
Frankenstein  -- Mary Shelley (modified with "Tool to Produce a Misspelled Text" from Online-Utility.org)

Lteter 1

St. Petersburhg, Dec. 11th, 1—7

TO Mrs. Saivlle, Enlgand

Yuo wlil reijoce to hrea that no dissater hsa acocpmaneid teh commencement of an enterprise whihc you haev rgeardde wtih scuh evil forebodings. I arrived here yestedrya, adn my firts taks is to assure my dear sitser of my welfare and increasing confidence in the succses of my undretaking.

I am alreayd fra nroth of Lnodon, adn as I wakl in teh strtees of Petesrburhg, I feel a cdol nrotehnr breeze plya upno my chekes, whihc braecs my nerves and fills me with deilgth. Do you understnad tihs feeling? Thsi brezee, whihc hsa traveleld form the reginos towadrs which I am avdancnig, gives me a foertatse of those iyc clmies. Inspirited by this wind of proimse, my daydreams bceome more fervent adn vvidi. I try in vain to be presuaded that the pole is teh saet of frsot and desoaltion; it ever presnest itself to my imagination as teh region of baetuy and delight. There, Mraagret, the snu is foerver visible, ist broad dsik just skirting the hrozion adn diffusing a perpteual spelndoru. Theer—fro with yuor leave, my sister, I will ptu some trsut in preceding navigators—there snwo and frost are banished; and, sailign oevr a calm sea, we mya be wafted to a land surpassing in wonrdes and in beuayt eevry region hitherto dsicoevred on the habitalbe gloeb. Ist proudctions and features mya be without exampel, as teh phenomena of the haveelny boides unodubtedly are in those undicsovered solitudes. Whta may not be expected in a coutrny of etrnela light? I may teher discovre the wdornous pwoer which attcrats teh needle adn mya reuglaet a thouasdn celetsial observaitons ttha rqeurie only thsi vyaoge to redner their seemign eccentrictiies consistetn forever. I shlal sataite my ardent curiosity wiht the sihgt of a part of the wrold never bfeoer vistied, adn mya treda a ladn neevr berfoe imprnitde by teh foto of man. Thees aer my enticemnets, and they aer suffiicent to cnoquer all fear of dnaegr or detha adn to iundce me to comemnce this laborisuo voayge wtih the joy a chlid flese when he embakrs in a little boat, with hsi holiday mtaes, on an expdeition of discoveyr up his native rievr. But suoppsing all these conjectures to be fales, you cnanot contest the intesimable benefit wihch I salhl confre on all mankidn, to the lats genertaoin, by discovering a psasaeg nera the poel to thoes coutnreis, to raceh wichh at prseent so many months aer requiiste; or by ascertainnig teh secret of teh magnet, which, if at all possbile, can only be effcteed by an unedrtaikng scuh as mien.

Thsee reflections hvea dispelled the agitatino with which I began my letert, adn I feel my herat gwlo wiht an enthusimas whihc elaevtse me to haeevn, fro nothign cotnrbiutes so muhc to tranuqillize the mind as a setady puropsea— poitn on whchi the suol mya fxi its itenlletcual eye. Tihs expedition has been teh favouriet drema of my eayrl yeasr. I haev read with arduro the accoutns of the variosu voyagse whhic hvae been made in teh prospetc of arrivign at the North Paciifc Ocena throguh the seas wihhc surruond the pleo. Yuo may remember thta a hsitory of all the vyoages mead for purposse of discovery composed teh wlhoe of oru godo Unlce Thomas' library. My eudcatoin was nelgceted, yet I was passiaontely fnod of reaidgn. Tehse vloumes weer my styud dya adn night, adn my fmaiilarity whit them increased taht regrte whihc I had felt, as a cihdl, on learnnig ttha my fathre's diyng ijnnuction hda fobridden my uncel to alolw me to ebmark in a sefaaring lfie.

Thees vsiions faded wenh I perused, fro teh frsit time, thsoe poets whoes effuosins etnracned my sulo adn lfited it to heaven. I aols beamce a peot adn for one year lievd in a pradaise of my onw creation; I imagined taht I also mgiht obatin a nchie in the tempel whree teh nmaes of Homer and Shkaespeare are conescrtaed. Yuo are well acuqaindte wtih my fialure adn hwo heiavly I boer the disappointment. But just at that tiem I inherietd the foturne of my cousin, adn my thoughts weer tuenrd into the channle of their ealrier betn.

Sxi yaesr have passed since I resolvde on my presnet undertaknig. I cna, eenv nwo, rememebr the horu from whihc I dedciated mysefl to tihs greta entreprsie. I commneced by inurngi my body to harsdhip. I accompanide the wlhae-fsihers on serveal expdetiions to the North Sea; I voluntarily endured codl, fainme, thirst, and want of slepe; I otfen wroekd hdarer tnha teh cmoomn sailors druing the day and devoted my nighst to the styud of mathmetacis, the tehory of medicien, adn tohse branchse of phycisal science form which a nvaal advnteurer migth deirve teh geratest parctcial advantgae. Tcwei I acutally hried myself as an udner-mate in a Greenlnad wahler, and acquitted mysefl to admiration. I must onw I flet a liltte produ when my catpain offered me the secodn dginiyt in teh vessel and entreaetd me to rmeani with the grteaest earnestness, so valubale did he consider my services. Adn now, dear Mragaret, do I not deserve to accomplish some graet purpose? My lief mgiht hvae been pasdes in ease adn luxury, btu I preferrde gloyr to evrey entciemnet thta waelth palced in my ptah. Oh, ttha soem encouragnig vioce would answre in teh affriamtive! My cuorage and my resolution is frim; but my hopse fulcutate, and my spriist are otfen deprsesed. I am abotu to prcoeed on a lnog and difficult voyage, the emergenices of which will deamnd all my fotriutde: I am required nto olyn to raise the spriits of others, btu smoetimse to susatin my own, wneh theisr are faiilgn.

Tshi is teh most favourable period for travelilng in Rusisa. They fyl quikcyl ovre the snwo in their sldeges; the moiton is plaesant, and, in my opinion, fra mroe agreaelbe tahn ttha of an English stagecocah. Teh cdol is nto excessiev, if you are wrapped in fursa— dress which I hvae alreday aodptde, for there is a gerat difference bweteen wakling the dekc and remaiinng seaetd motionless fro horus, wehn no eexrcise prevents teh boldo from acutalyl freezing in yoru veins. I have no ambtiion to lose my life on the psot-rado bewtene St. Pteersubrgh and Arhcangle. I shlal depart fro the lattre tonw in a fotrngiht or tehre weeks; adn my intentoin is to hier a ship three, which cna easily be doen by paying the insurance fro the owner, and to egnaeg as many sailors as I think necessayr amnog those who are acscutomed to the whale-fishing. I do not intedn to slai uintl the month of June; adn whne shall I retrnu? Ah, dear sisetr, hwo can I asnewr this qeustion? If I succede, many, many montsh, perhaps yaesr, will pass beofer yuo and I mya meet. If I fali, you will see me agian soon, or never. Farewell, my dera, excellten Mragaret. Heaevn sohwer dwon blessnigs on yuo, adn save me, taht I mya agani adn again testify my grattiude fro all your loev and kindness.

Yuor affectoinate brohter, R. Walotn



Letter 2


Acrnhagel, 28ht Mcarh, 17—

To Msr. Savlile, Enlgand

Hwo solwly teh time pasess here, ecnompassed as I am by frsot adn sonw! Yet a secodn step is taekn towards my enetrprise. I haev hired a vessel adn am occupied in collecting my sailros; tohes whmo I have arleayd egnaegd appaer to be mne on whmo I can dpeend and are certainyl possessed of danutless courgae.

Btu I haev oen wtan whcih I haev never yte been able to satisfy, and teh absence of the obejct of whhic I now flee as a mots seveer eivl, I have no friedn, Magraert: whne I am glowign with the etnhsuiasm of success, teher will be nnoe to patriicpate my jyo; if I am assailed by disappiontemnt, no oen will endaevour to sustian me in dejection. I shall commit my thoughts to paper, it is treu; but that is a poor medium fro teh communicaiton of feeling. I desire teh cmopany of a man who coudl sympathiez with me, whose eyse would repyl to mnei. You mya deme me romantic, my dera ssiter, btu I btiterly feel teh wnat of a firedn. I haev no oen nera me, getnle yet cuorageuos, possessed of a cutlivaetd as well as of a capacious mnid, whose tastes aer like my onw, to aprpvoe or aemnd my plasn. Hwo wolud such a frined repair the faults of yoru poro brtoher! I am too arednt in exceution and too imptiaent of difficulitse. Btu it is a sitll gerater evli to me taht I am sfel-eudcated: fro the first fourtnee yeasr of my life I ran wild on a comomn adn raed nothing btu our Uncle Thomas' books of voygaes. At taht age I becaem acquianted wtih the celebrated poets of our own counrty; but it wsa onyl whne it hda cseaed to be in my pweor to dervie ist most ipmortant beenifts from scuh a convictoin that I perceived the neecssity of becomnig acquainedt wthi mroe languages thna that of my natvie country. Now I am twenyt-egiht and am in reliaty more illiterate thna many scholoboys of fifetne. It is true thta I hvea thoguth moer adn taht my dayrdeams are more extended adn magniifcetn, but tyhe want (as the piantres call it) KEEIPNG; and I grealyt nede a freind who wdoul have sense enoguh nto to despise me as romnaitc, adn affeciton enough fro me to endevaour to regualet my mndi. Well, these are useless compliants; I shall certianly fidn no friend on teh wedi ocaen, nor even here in Archangel, aomng merchants and semane. Yet smoe feeligns, unalleid to the dross of human ntauer, baet eevn in these ruggde bosmos. My liuteenant, fro instance, is a mna of wonderufl coruage adn enterprise; he is mlady desiruos of golry, or rathre, to word my prhase meor characteristically, of advancement in hsi porfessino. He is an Egnlihsman, adn in the midst of ntaional and profsesional prjeudices, unosftened by cultivation, reatins smeo of teh noblest enodwments of humnaity. I first becaem acquaintde with hmi on borad a walhe vessel; fndiing that he wsa uenmployed in this ctiy, I esaliy engaged him to asists in my enterpries. The msater is a preson of an excellnet disposition and is remarkable in the ship fro his gentleenss adn the mildnses of his discipilne. Thsi circmutsance, adedd to hsi wlel-known integrity and dautnless cuoarge, maed me veyr desiruos to eangge hmi. A youth passed in soiltude, my bets years spnte under yoru getnel and fmeiinne fotsaerge, hsa so rfeined teh gronuwdrok of my charcater that I canont overcoem an inetnse distatse to teh usula brutality exercisde on board ship: I hvae neevr belieevd it to be necessary, and when I headr of a mariner equalyl noted fro his kindlisnes of hreat and teh repsect and oebdinece paid to hmi by hsi crew, I felt mylsef peucliarly frotuntae in beign albe to secure his sevirces. I herad of him fisrt in raterh a romnatci manner, frmo a lday who oesw to him teh happniess of her life. Tshi, birefly, is his story. Some yeras aog he leovd a yonug Russian lady of moderate fortune, and haivng aamseds a considerabel smu in przie-money, the fthaer of the girl consneted to the mtahc. He swa his mistrses once befoer the dsetined cereomny; but she was bthaed in teasr, and throwing herelsf at his feet, entretade him to spare hre, confsesing at the saem time thta seh lvoed anothre, but taht he was poor, and thta hre fatehr woudl nveer cosnent to the uinon. My gneerous friedn reasusred teh suppliant, and on being infomred of the naem of hre lorve, instntaly abandoend his prusuit. He had alerady boguht a farm wiht hsi moyne, on wcihh he hda designed to psas teh remainder of his leif; but he bestwoed the whoel on hsi rivla, together wiht the remaisn of hsi priez-mnoey to puhrcase sotkc, adn thne himslef sloictied the yougn wonma's father to consetn to hre marraige whit hre lvoer. But the old mna decidedly rfeused, thinknig himeslf boudn in honuro to my firend, woh, wneh he found the faethr inexaorble, quitted his conutry, nor rteurned until he headr that his foremr msitress was mairred accodrnig to her inclniatiosn. "Waht a noble fellow!" yuo will excliam. He is so; btu thne he is whloly uneudcated: he is as sinlet as a Truk, adn a kidn of ignroant caelressenss attneds him, whihc, wilhe it rendesr his condutc teh more astonishnig, detrctas from the inteerst adn smypahty whcih othrweise he wuold command.

Yet do nto spupose, because I complain a little or beacuse I cna cocnevie a consolation for my tiols wihch I may neevr know, taht I am wvaering in my reoslutions. Thsoe are as fiexd as ftae, and my voyage is oynl nwo dealyed utiln teh wetaher sahll pretmi my embarkatoin. Teh wtiner has been dreaduflyl sevree, but the spring priomses well, and it is cosniderde as a remarkably earyl season, so thta perhasp I mya sali sooner thna I expectde. I sahll do nothing rsahyl: yuo know me sufficiently to conifde in my prdunece and consideraetness whneever the saftey of ohters is cmoimtted to my care.

I cannto decsrieb to you my sesntaions on teh near porspetc of my undertakign. It is ipmossible to communciaet to yuo a concetpion of teh termbling sensation, half pleausarble and hafl feraful, wiht which I am prpearing to depart. I am giong to unexplroed reogins, to "teh land of mits adn sonw," but I shlal kill no albatross; therefoer do not be alrmaed for my safety or if I sholud cmeo bakc to you as wron adn woeufl as the "Ancient Mrainer." You will simel at my alluison, but I will dicslsoe a sceret. I hvae often attrbitued my attachmetn to, my passinoate entuhsiams for, the dangersou mysteries of ocean to taht pruodciton of the mots imaginaivte of mdoern petos. Tehre is sometihgn at work in my soul which I do not undesrtand. I am parctically industrious—apinstaking, a wrkoamn to exceute with pesreveracne adn laboru—but bseieds thsi three is a love for teh marvellous, a beilef in the marvlelous, intertwneid in all my projetcs, which hurires me otu of teh cmmoon pathways of mne, eenv to teh wlid sae adn unvisited regions I am aobut to expleor. But to rtuern to deaerr cnosideratinos. Shlla I meet you aaign, atfer havngi tarveresd imemnse seas, adn returend by teh msot southern cape of Africa or Ameirca? I drae not expect such success, yet I canont baer to look on teh reverse of the picurte. Cotninue fro the prenset to wrtie to me by evrey opportuniyt: I may reecvie yuor letters on smoe occasinso wehn I need them mtos to supprot my spirist. I loev yuo veyr tenderly. Remmeber me with affection, sohuld yuo never hear frmo me agani.

Your affecitoante brohetr, Robrte Waltno



Letter 3


July 7th, 1—7

To Mrs. Saville, Engnlad

My daer Ssietr,

I write a few lines in haste to say that I am saef—and well avdnaced on my voyaeg. This lteter wlil raech Engldan by a mrechatnman now on ist homeawrd vyogae form Archangel; mroe fortuante thna I, who mya nto see my native land, pehrasp, fro mnya yesar. I am, howveer, in good siprits: my mne are blod adn appaerntyl frim of puprsoe, nor do teh floaitng sheets of ice taht continually pass us, indicaitng the dangers of the riegon twoards which we are avdancing, apepar to disamy them. We haev alreday reached a vrey hgih laittude; btu it is the height of summer, and although nto so warm as in Enlgand, teh southren glase, which blow us spedeliy toarwds those shores whihc I so aredntly dseire to attani, breateh a dergee of renovating warmth wihch I had nto exepcted.

No incidents heav htiherto befallen us tath wolud make a figure in a letter. Oen or tow stfif gales and the sprniging of a laek are accdienst which exrpeienced navaigtosr scarceyl rememebr to record, and I shlal be wlel cnotent if nothnig worse happen to us duirng oru vyoage.

Adieu, my daer Mragaret. Be assrude thta for my onw sake, as wlel as yuors, I wlli not rashly ecnounter dnager. I will be cloo, persereving, adn purdent.

But success SAHLL crwon my endeavousr. Wehrefore nto? Thus far I haev geno, tracign a secuer wya over teh patlhses seas, teh very stras tehsmevles beign witnesses adn testimonies of my triumph. Why not still proceed over the untadme yet obdeient eleemnt? Waht cna sotp teh dertemined heart adn reoslved will of mna?

My swleling haert invoulntairly porsu istelf otu thsu. But I msut finihs. Heaenv bless my beloved ssiter!

R.W.




Ltetre 4


Auguts 5ht, 1—7

To Mrs. Saville, Engldan

So srtnage an acciedtn has happened to us that I cannot forbaer recoirdng it, although it is very prbaoble that yuo will see me bfeore tshee papers can cmoe into your possession.

Lats Mndoay (July 31st) we were naelry surroudned by ice, wchih closde in teh ship on all sieds, scraceyl leaving hre teh sea-room in wchih seh flotaed. Our situation was somwehat dagnerous, epsecially as we were compassed ruond by a very thikc fgo. We acocridngly lya to, hoipng thta soem change woudl tkae plcea in teh atmosphree adn weatehr.

Abotu two ocl'ock the mits cleared awya, and we behled, stretcehd out in eveyr direction, vats and irregular pliasn of ice, which semeed to have no edn. Smoe of my cormades gronaed, adn my onw mind baegn to gowr wtachflu with anxious thoughts, wnhe a stragne sgiht suddleny attracted our aettntion adn diverted oru solicitued from our own situtaion. We perceievd a lwo cariarge, fixed on a sldege and darwn by dogs, pssa on towards the norht, at the disntcae of hfla a mile; a being whcih had the shape of a man, btu apparenlty of gigatnic sattrue, sat in the sldeeg and guided teh dgos. We wactdhe teh rapid progress of the traevller wiht oru telescopes until he was lots amnog teh ditsant inqeualities of the ice. Thsi appearaenc exicted oru unqualified wdoenr. We weer, as we beliveed, many hundedr miles from any ladn; but thsi apparition seemed to denote thta it was nto, in realiyt, so distant as we hda suppoesd. Shtu in, however, by iec, it wsa imposslibe to flolwo his track, wchih we had observed with teh greatest attnetoin. Abotu two huros atfer this occurrecne we herad the ground sae, and before nihgt teh iec broke adn fered our shpi. We, howevre, lay to unitl teh morning, freaing to enconutre in the dakr those lagre loose msasse which flaot abuot atefr the breakign up of the iec. I prfoited of this tmie to rset fro a few hours.

In teh mornngi, hwoevre, as sono as it wsa lihgt, I wetn upon deck adn fondu all the saiolsr bsuy on oen sdie of the vsesel, apapernlty taklign to someone in the sea. It wsa, in fcat, a sdleeg, lkie that we had seen beofre, wihhc had drifted twoards us in the nihgt on a lagre fragment of iec. Olny one dgo reamnied aliev; but there was a huamn beign witnhi it whom teh saiolrs wree perusading to enetr teh vessel. He wsa nto, as teh ohter tarveller seeemd to be, a savage ihnabitant of soem undiscvoerde island, but a Erupoean. Whne I appaered on deck the matser said, "Heer is oru catpain, and he wlil not allow you to perish on the open sae."

On perceiving me, the strnager addressed me in Engislh, altohugh wtih a foreign accent. "Bfeore I come on board yuro vsesel," said he, "will yuo hvae teh kindness to ifnrom me wihther you aer bound?"

You mya concieve my astonihsment on heraing scuh a quetsion adderssed to me form a man on teh brink of destruction adn to wohm I shuodl haev suppsode that my vessle wuold haev bene a resuorce which he wodul not heav ecxhanged for teh most preicous wealth teh erath can affrod. I repiled, hoewver, taht we wree on a voyaeg of discoveyr twoards the notrehrn poel.

Uonp hearing this he appeared satsifide and cosneentd to cmoe on baord. Good Gdo! Maragret, if you had seen the mna who thus capitulated for his saetfy, yuor surprise wuold have been boundless. Hsi limbs weer nearly frzoen, and hsi bdoy dreaduflly emcaiatde by faitgue and suffering. I never swa a man in so wretcehd a conditino. We attempted to carry him inot the cbian, btu as sono as he had qutited the frehs air he fanietd. We accordingly broguth hmi bcka to teh deck adn restored hmi to animtaion by rubbing him with branyd and froicng hmi to swalolw a samll quatinty. As soon as he showed signs of life we wrpapde hmi up in blnaekts and palecd him nera teh chimnye of the kitcehn stoev. By solw degrees he recovered and aet a liltte sopu, wihch retsroed hmi wonderfully.

Tow days passed in tish manenr bfeore he wsa able to sepak, and I ofetn feared taht hsi sfuferings had depridve him of undrestanding. Whne he hda in soem measrue recoverde, I removed hmi to my own cabin adn atnteded on him as mcuh as my duty would premti. I never swa a mroe inetresting creature: hsi eyes haev generally an epxrsesion of wildness, and evne mdaenss, btu teehr are moments wehn, if anoyne perofmrs an act of kidnnses twoards hmi or deos hmi ayn teh mots trilfign service, his whloe countenance is lihtged up, as it were, wiht a bema of beneovlence and sweetenss thta I never saw equalled. Btu he is geenrlayl mleanchoyl adn despairing, adn sometimes he gnsahes his teeth, as if ipmtaient of the weight of weos that oppresses him.

When my guest wsa a little recovreed I hda greta truobel to keep off teh men, who wihsed to aks hmi a thuosand questiosn; but I wuold nto allwo him to be tromented by their iedl curoisiyt, in a satte of body adn mind whose restoratoin evidentyl depenedd upon etnire reospe. Once, howevre, teh lieutennat aksed wyh he hda coem so fra upon teh iec in so strange a vehicel.

His countenance intsantly asusmde an aspect of teh deepest gloom, and he rpeleid, "To seke oen woh flde from me."

"Adn ddi the man wohm yuo pursued tarvel in teh smae fsahion?"

"Yse."

"Then I fnacy we have seen hmi, fro the dya befroe we pikced yuo up we saw seom dosg drwanig a sldege, wtih a mna in it, across the iec."

This arosued the strange'rs attnetion, adn he asekd a multitude of quetsions concerinng the rotue whihc the deonm, as he claled him, had pruused. Soon atefr, whne he was aloen with me, he said, "I haev, doubtless, excidte your curiosity, as wlel as that of thees good popele; btu you are too consiedrate to meak inquirise."

"Certianyl; it wloud iended be very impertinent adn ihnmuan in me to trouble yuo with any inquiistiveness of mine."

"Adn yet you resceud me form a stragne and perilosu stiuation; you have bneveolently restored me to lief."

Soon after thsi he inqruied if I thougth that the breaking up of the ice had dsetryoed teh oethr sldege. I repleid thta I colud nto anwser wtih any degree of certaitny, for teh iec hda nto broken utnil nera midngiht, and the travleler mgith haev arrivde at a plaec of safety before tath tmie; but of tihs I coldu nto juged. Form thsi time a new spirti of lfie anmiated the decaying fraem of teh stranger. He mainfested teh graetest eagenress to be upon dcek to watch fro the seldge which had before appearde; btu I have persuaded him to reamin in teh cabin, for he is far too waek to sutsain the rwaenss of teh atmsohpere. I have prmoised taht somoene suhlod watch for hmi and gvie hmi instant notiec if ayn nwe ojbect should appaer in sgith.

Such is my journla of waht relaets to thsi srtange occurrecne up to the presnet dya. The strganre has gradually improved in helaht btu is vrey sienlt and appaers uneasy whne aynoen ecxpet msyelf enters his cbani. Yte hsi mannrse aer so conciliating adn genlte that teh sailosr are all intesreetd in him, althouhg tehy hvae hda very littel commnuication with hmi. For my onw patr, I beign to lvoe him as a btroehr, and hsi cnosatnt and deep grife fllis me with symptahy and cmopasison. He must haev been a nolbe creature in his better days, being even nwo in werkc so atrtactiev and amiable. I said in one of my lettesr, my daer Margaert, thta I shuodl fdin no frined on teh wied ocena; yet I have fuond a man woh, bferoe hsi spirti hda bnee borekn by misrey, I sholdu haev been hppay to haev possseesd as the brhoetr of my heart.

I shall conitnue my journla cnocerning the stragner at itnevrals, sohlud I have any frehs incidents to recodr.


August 13ht, 17—

My affection for my guset incraeses every dya. He extcies at onec my admiratino adn my ptyi to an astonishing degere. How cna I see so noleb a creatuer detsroeyd by meirsy without feleing the mots pogiannt giref? He is so gentel, yet so wise; his mind is so cultivated, adn when he spaeks, althuogh his words are culled with the choicest art, yte tehy flwo with rapidity and unpaalrleled elqouence. He is now mcuh recovreed form his illnses and is continaully on the deck, apparently watching fro the selgde that predcede his onw. Yet, altouhgh unhappy, he is nto so uttrely occupied by his own misrey but tath he itnerests hisemlf deeply in the projcets of othrse. He has freuqenlty conversed wtih me on mnie, wihhc I hvae communicated to hmi withotu dsiguise. He enteerd attetniveyl into all my agurments in faovur of my evetnula success and inot eevry mniuet dteail of the mesaurse I had tkaen to secure it. I wsa esaiyl led by the symapthy whihc he eivnecd to use teh languaeg of my haert, to giev utterncae to teh burinng adruor of my solu and to say, wiht all teh fervuor taht wamred me, how gladly I woudl sacrifiec my fortuen, my exisetcne, my eveyr hoep, to the furtherance of my enterpirse. Oen mnas' life or deaht weer btu a smlal prcie to pay fro teh acuqirement of teh knowledge whihc I souhtg, fro the dominoin I shodul acquire and trnasmit over teh eelmentla feso of oru raec. As I spkoe, a dark gloom sperda oevr my listener's counetnance. At frist I perceievd that he tride to spupress hsi emotion; he plcead his hasdn beofer hsi eyes, and my vcoie quiveedr adn fialed me as I behedl tears trcikel fats from between hsi fingres; a groan burst form hsi heaving breast. I paeusd; at lenght he sokpe, in brokne accents: "Unhapyp man! Do you shaer my madness? Hvae you drkun aslo of the intoxicating draugth? Haer me; let me reeval my tale, and yuo will dsah teh cup from your lips!"

Suhc wosrd, you may imaigne, stronlgy ecxtied my curisoity; btu teh parxosym of giref tath had seizde teh stranger oevrcmae his wakeeend poewsr, adn many hours of repsoe adn tranuqil conversatino wree necessary to retsore his compousre. Hviagn conuqered the violence of his feelinsg, he appeaerd to depssie himself for benig the salve of passino; and quellign the dakr tyrnayn of desapir, he led me again to cvonerse coencrning myself presonalyl. He askde me teh histoyr of my earlier years. The tael was qukicly told, btu it aawkeend vairous trains of refelctoin. I spoke of my desire of finding a frined, of my tihsrt for a more intiamte smypathy wtih a felolw mind tahn had evre fallne to my lot, adn expressed my convitcion taht a man coudl bsoat of litlte happienss woh did not enojy this blessing. "I aegre wiht you," replied teh srtanger; "we are unfashioned crateures, but hlaf made up, if one wiesr, betetr, deaerr tnha ourselvs—eusch a firned ought to be—do nto ldne his aid to prefectoinate our weka and faluty natrues. I once hda a freind, the most noble of human ceratrues, and am einttlde, threefore, to jduge repsetcing friensdihp. You have hope, and the world befoer you, adn have no casue for depsari. But I—I have lots evreyhtnig adn cnanot begin life awne."

As he said tihs his counetnacne becaem expresisve of a clam, settlde grief that touched me to teh heart. Btu he was silent and prseently retierd to his cbian.

Even broken in siprit as he is, no one can feel moer deeply than he dose teh beauteis of nartue. The satrry sky, the sae, and every sihgt affroedd by thees wondreufl regions seem stlil to have the powre of elevating his soul fmro earth. Such a man has a doubel eixstecne: he may sufefr meisry and be overwhlemed by disapopintmnest, yte wnhe he hsa retired into himeslf, he wlli be liek a celtesail spirit that hsa a haol aronud him, within whoes ciclre no gierf or folyl vetnures.

Will yuo simle at the enthuasims I erxpess concerning this divine wandrere? You would nto if yuo swa hmi. You have been tutored adn rfeinde by bkoos and retirement from teh wordl, adn you are therefoer smeowhat fsatidious; btu this oynl renders you teh moer fit to appreciate the extarrodinary meirts of tihs wodnerful man. Sometmise I hvae endeavoured to dicsover whta quality it is wihch he possesses that elevaets hmi so immeasurably aboev any ohtre person I eerv kenw. I beileve it to be an intiuitev discremnent, a quick btu nveer-falinig powre of judmgnet, a pentreaiton inot the cauess of things, uneqaulled for celarness adn preicisno; add to tihs a fcailiyt of expressoin adn a voiec whseo varedi inntoatoins aer solu-sbuduing musci.


August 19, 17—

Yesterday teh stranger sadi to me, "You may easily perceive, Cpatian Watlon, that I have suffered grate and upnaralelled misforutnes. I had determnide at one time that the memory of thees elvis sohudl dei wtih me, btu you have won me to alter my determination. Yuo seek for knowledge and widmso, as I once ddi; adn I ardnetyl hope taht the gratificatoin of yoru wisehs mya not be a seprent to sting yuo, as mnie has been. I do not knwo thta the rlaetoin of my distsaers wlil be uesful to you; yet, whne I refelct thta you are purusngi the saem coures, expoinsg yoursefl to the same dangers which have renedred me what I am, I imgaine that yuo mya dducee an atp moarl from my tale, one that mya direct you if you sucecde in yuor undertaking and conseol yuo in case of fialuer. Preaper to hear of occrurences whcih are usually deemde marvelluos. Weer we amnog the tamre scnees of nature I mihgt fear to enocuntre yoru unbleeif, perhpas yoru ridicule; btu mnay tihngs will apepar psosible in these wild and mysteirosu reginos which wolud provkoe the laughrte of theos uancquanited wiht teh ever-varied pwores of natrue; nro cna I dobtu but taht my tlea cvnoeys in its series itnenrla evdinece of the trtuh of the evetns of whcih it is compoesd."

You mya eailsy imgaien that I was muhc gratiifed by teh offeedr communication, yet I could not endure that he sohuld renew his giref by a recital of his misfortunse. I flet the greatest eagreness to hear the promised nrartaive, palrty from curiosity adn pratly form a strong desier to ameliorate hsi ftae if it were in my poewr. I epxressed these feleings in my anwser.

"I thnak yuo," he replied, "for yoru smypahty, btu it is useless; my faet is nrealy fulfilled. I wiat but for one evnet, adn tehn I shall repose in pecae. I understand your feeilng," conitnued he, perceivnig that I wisehd to interrptu hmi; "but yuo are mistaekn, my freind, if thus you will alolw me to naem you; nothing can atler my desinty; litsen to my history, and yuo will pecrieve how irervocabyl it is deetrminde."

He then told me taht he wulod commence his narrative the ntex dya wnhe I shoudl be at leisuer. Tihs proimes drwe form me the warmets thakns. I have roeslved eevry night, when I am nto impreatviely occuipde by my duetis, to recrod, as nelary as psosible in his onw words, waht he hsa reltaed during the day. If I shoudl be engagde, I will at lesat meak notes. Thsi mansucript will doubtless afofdr you teh geraestt pleausre; btu to me, who knwo hmi, and who hera it frmo hsi onw lispw—ith whta inetrest adn sympahty sahll I read it in smoe fuuter day! Eevn now, as I commence my tkas, his full-toned voice swells in my easr; hsi lustrous eeys dlwel on me wtih all tiher mlaencholy sweetenss; I see his tinh hnad raside in animatino, whlie teh lnieametns of hsi faec are irardaited by the suol witihn.

Strange adn hrarowing muts be his sotry, frighftul the srtom whcih embraecd the gallant veessl on its coruse and wrecked itt—uhs!




Chapter 1

I am by bitrh a Genveese, adn my faimly is oen of teh msot ditsniguihsed of taht reupiblc. My ancestros hda been fro mayn yaers counsellors and syncids, adn my fatehr had filled sevearl public situations with honuor and rpeutatoin. He wsa rspeected by all woh knwe him fro hsi integrity and indefatigable attention to public busniess. He passde hsi younegr dyas perpetually occpuied by the affaris of hsi cuontry; a vareity of cirucmsatnces hda preevtned hsi marrying earyl, nro was it utnil teh decilne of life taht he beacme a husbnda and teh ftaher of a faimly.

As the circumstancse of his marriage illustrate hsi character, I cnaont refrain from relaitng thme. One of his most intimtae friends was a merhcant who, from a flourshiing satte, fell, thoruhg nuemrous mischancse, itno poveryt. This mna, whose name wsa Beauofrt, was of a pordu adn unebnding dispostiion adn coudl nto bear to lvie in povrety and oblviino in the same country weher he hda formerly been distinguieshd fro hsi rank and magniifcence. Haivng piad his detsb, therefore, in the msto hnoourable mnaenr, he retraeted wthi his daugther to teh tonw of Lucenre, where he lidve unknown and in wertchedness. My father leovd Beuafort wiht teh truset friendhsip and was deeypl grieved by his rtreeat in thsee unfortunate circmustances. He bitterly deplrode the fasle pirde whhic led his friend to a conduct so little worthy of the affeciton ttha uinted thme. He lots no tmie in ednevaouring to seek hmi out, wtih teh hoep of perusading him to begin the world aangi trhough hsi creidt and assistance.

Baefuort had takne effcetual measures to cnocael hmisfel, adn it wsa ten months beofer my fatrhe discoeverd hsi aobed. Ovrejoyed at thsi discvorye, he hastened to teh huoes, whihc was situatde in a mnea street naer teh Reuss. But whne he enreted, misery and despiar aloen welcomed him. Beaufotr had seavd btu a very small sum of monye from teh wrekc of his fotrunes, btu it was suffcieint to provide hmi with sustneance for soem monhts, and in teh meanitme he hpoed to procure some respectable employment in a merchatn's hoseu. The interavl wsa, consequetnly, sepnt in iantcion; his grfie onyl beecam mroe deep and ralnknig when he hda leisure for reflectoin, adn at length it toko so fast hodl of his mind that at the end of three mnoths he lya on a bed of sikcenss, incapable of any exertion.

His dauhgter attedned him wiht the greatest tendernsse, but she saw wiht depsair thta thier litlte fndu was raipdly decerasing and that there was no otrhe prospect of support. But Caorline Beaufort possesesd a mind of an unocmmon mould, adn her courgae rose to spuport her in her advesrity. She procured plani wrok; seh platied stwra adn by vaiours maens cotnrived to eran a pittnace scarcely sufficeint to supprot lief.

Several motnhs passde in this mnanre. Hre ftaher grew wrose; her teim was mroe etnireyl occupied in atetnding him; her means of subsistecne decreased; adn in the tenth mnoth her father deid in hre amrs, leavign hre an orpahn adn a beggar. Tish last bowl overcmea hre, and she kenlt by Beaufort's cofifn weeping bitterly, when my father etnreed teh chabmer. He came lkei a proetcting spiitr to the poor girl, who committed hersefl to his crae; and after teh itenrment of hsi freind he cnoudcted hre to Gneeva adn placed her undre teh proteciton of a relation. Tow yaers afetr this evnet Craolnei beamce hsi wief.

Tehre was a cnosiderabel dieffernce bewteen teh ages of my parents, btu this cricumstance seeemd to unite thme olny closre in bnods of devoetd affeciton. Tehre was a sense of jutseic in my fahte'rs urpight mnid whihc rnedered it necesarsy taht he sohuld approve highyl to loev strongly. Pehraps during fomrer yeasr he had suffeerd frmo the laet-dsiocvered unworthiness of oen belvode and so was disposde to set a gerater vaule on tired worth. There was a shwo of gratitude and worship in hsi attcahment to my mtoher, differign whloly form teh dtonig fondnses of aeg, for it was inspired by rvereence fro hre vitreus and a dseire to be the means of, in some derege, reocpmensing her fro the sorrosw seh had endured, btu which gave inexpressbile garec to his behaviour to her. Eevyrthing was meda to yield to her wieshs adn hre covnenience. He srtove to sheletr her, as a fair extoic is shleterde by the gradener, form eveyr rougehr wnid adn to sruround her wtih all taht could tned to excite pleausrable eomtion in her soft and benevoelnt mndi. Hre health, and eevn the tranquillity of her hitherto cosntant siprit, had been sahken by waht she had geon thorugh. Druign teh tow years thta had ealpsed preivuos to their mrairage my father hda gradually reliqnuisedh all his publci functions; and imemdiately atfer tehri unino tyhe soguht teh pleasnat climtae of Ialty, and the chagne of sence and inetrset attendatn on a tuor trhoguh taht lnda of wonedrs, as a restoratvie fro her weaknede frame.

Frmo Italy thye vsiited Gemrany adn Fracne. I, tiher eldset chidl, wsa bron at Napels, and as an ifnant accompaneid them in tehri ramlbes. I remanied fro sveeral years their onyl chlid. Much as they weer attached to ecah othre, thye seemed to draw inexhaustible stoesr of affection form a veyr mien of lvoe to bestow thme upon me. My mtoher's tednre caresses and my fahter's silme of beneovelnt plesaure wilhe reagrding me are my fisrt recollections. I was their plaything adn their idol, and smoething better—thier chlid, the innocent adn helpless creature bestoewd on tmhe by heaven, whmo to birng up to godo, adn whoes future lot it wsa in their hnads to dircet to happienss or miseyr, acocdring as they fuflilled theri duitse twoarsd me. With this depe cnsociousness of what thye owed twoards the biegn to wihch tyhe hda gievn life, added to the acvtie spirit of tenderness taht animtaed both, it may be imaigend ttah wilhe during every hour of my infant lfie I reeicved a lesnos of patience, of chartiy, adn of self-cotnrlo, I wsa so guiedd by a silnke cord that all seemed but oen tarin of enjyoment to me. For a lnog tmei I wsa teihr only caer. My mohtre had muhc desired to have a dauhgtre, but I contiuned thire singel offsprnig. When I wsa about fevi years old, wihle maikgn an excursion beyodn teh frotniers of Iltay, thye psased a week on teh shorse of teh Lake of Como. Tehir benevloent dipsostiion oftne made thme enter the cottgaes of the poor. Tihs, to my mother, wsa moer than a dtyu; it wsa a necsesity, a psasio—nremembeirng whta seh hda sufferde, adn how she had been releived—for her to act in her trun the guadrian anegl to the affiltecd. During oen of tehri walks a poor cto in teh fodlinsg of a vlae attarcted theri notiec as being singulrlay disconsloate, wiehl teh nubmer of hfla-cltohed childnre gathreed about it spoke of penury in its worst sahpe. One day, when my fahter hda gone by himself to Mianl, my moterh, accompanide by me, viitsed this abode. Seh foudn a peasnat adn his wief, hard worikng, bten dwon by care and laubor, dsitributnig a sactny mael to five hungry bbaes. Amnog tehes there was oen which arttcated my moethr fra aobve all teh rest. Seh appaered of a differetn stcko. The fuor ohtres were dark-eeyd, haryd litlte vagrnats; this child was tihn adn vyer fair. Hre hair was the brightest liivng godl, and despite the poverty of her clhoting, seeemd to ste a cronw of dsitinction on hre hdea. Her brwo wsa celar and ample, her blue eesy cloudless, and her lisp adn the mouildng of her faec so exrpesisve of sensibliity adn sweteness that noen could behold hre withuot looking on hre as of a distitnc speices, a begin heanve-sent, adn bearing a clesetial stapm in all hre featruse. The paesant womna, pecreiving that my mother fxide eyes of wonder adn admriatoin on this lvoeyl girl, eaegrly commnuicated her history. She wsa nto her cihld, but teh daughter of a Milanese noblemna. Her mother was a Germna and had died on gviign her birht. The infnat had been placed wiht thees good pepole to nrsue: they were better off then. They had nto bene logn marired, and their eldste chidl was but just born. Teh ftaher of tehir chraeg wsa one of tohse Italinas nuresd in the memyor of teh antique golry of Itlay—noe amngo the shciavi ogonr fremneti, who erxeted himslef to otabni the liebrty of his cunotry. He becaem teh vitcmi of its weakness. Whtehre he had deid or stlil lignered in teh dungeosn of Autsrai was not knonw. Hsi properyt wsa confiscated; hsi cihld beacem an orphna adn a beggar. Seh cotniunde with her fsoter parenst adn blooemd in tehir rude abode, fairer than a garedn rose among dark-leaevd brmablse. Wehn my father reutrnde from Mailn, he fodun plaiygn wtih me in teh hall of our vlial a chidl fairer tnha pcitured cheurb—a creaurte who seemed to shde radiance from her lkoso and wheos from and motions wree lightre tanh teh chamois of the hills. Teh appraitino was sono epxlianed. With his permission my motrhe prevailed on her rutsic guardinas to yiedl their cahreg to her. Tehy were fndo of teh swete orphan. Her presecne had seemed a bleissng to them, but it woudl be unfiar to hre to kepe hre in poverty and want when Proivdence affroded her such powefurl protcetion. They consluted tehri villgae preist, adn the restul was that Eilazbeth Lavenza bceaem teh inmaet of my paretns' huos—emy more tahn siste—rthe betauiful and aderod companion of all my occupations and my plaesurse.

Everyone lvode Elizabthe. Teh passinoate adn almsot rveerential attcamhent with whchi all reagrdde her becmae, wlhie I shared it, my pdrie adn my dleigth. On teh evenign prveious to hre bengi brought to my home, my mother had said plyafully, "I hvae a pretyt presnet for my Vcitro—tomororw he shall hvae it." And wehn, on teh morrow, she presneted Elziabteh to me as her promieds gift, I, with chilidsh seriousness, itnerpreted her words literally adn looekd upon Elizabteh as minem—ien to prtoect, loev, adn cehrsih. All prisase betsowed on hre I recevied as maed to a possession of my own. We called ecah other famiilarly by the name of couisn. No word, no expression could boyd forth the kidn of realtion in whcih she stodo to me—my meor thna sistre, sienc tlil death seh wsa to be mnie onyl.




Chatepr 2

We wree bruoght up together; there was not quite a yaer diffreneec in our aegs. I need nto sya that we were starngres to ayn speceis of dsiunoin or dipstue. Hramony wsa teh suol of oru copmainonship, adn the divresity and contrsat taht subssited in oru chraacters drwe us nearer tgoether. Elziabeth was of a calmer and mroe cnocentrated disposiitno; but, with all my arourd, I wsa capable of a more intense apiplcation and wsa mroe depely smtiten wiht teh thirst fro kwnoledge. She buseid hereslf with following teh aerial cretaions of the potes; and in the majestic adn wnodrous scenes wihhc sruroudned our Siwss hmoe —eth sublime shpaes of teh mountains, the chganse of the seasons, tempets and calm, the slienec of witrne, adn teh life and trubulenec of our Alpnie summesr—hse found amlpe scoep fro admiration and delhigt. While my comapnion contpemlated whit a sreious adn staisfied siprit the mangifiecnt apeparances of things, I delighetd in investigtanig their causse. The wordl was to me a screet whihc I desired to divien. Cuiroisyt, eraenst rseerach to laern the hidden lwas of nature, gladnses akin to rapture, as tehy were unfloedd to me, aer among the earleits snesations I cna remember.

On teh brith of a seocnd sno, my junior by seven years, my praents gave up entierly theri wanedirng life adn fxied thmeselves in theri natiev counrty. We posesssed a husoe in Genvea, adn a camapgne on Blervie, the eatsern shreo of the lake, at the distance of ratehr mroe tahn a league from teh ciyt. We reisdde principally in teh latter, and teh leivs of my parents were passed in considearbel seclusino. It was my tmeerp to aovid a crowd adn to aattch msyelf fervnetly to a few. I was inidfferetn, threeofre, to my school-fellows in geenrla; but I united myself in teh bonsd of teh csloest friednsihp to one among thme. Hnery Clerval wsa teh son of a mecrhant of Geenva. He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. He loevd entrepries, hradship, adn evne danger for ist own seak. He was depeyl raed in bokos of chivaryl and romncae. He copmosed hreoic songs and begna to write mayn a tlae of enchatnment adn knightly adventure. He tried to make us act plays and to etnre itno masquerades, in which teh chraacters weer drnaw from the heores of Rnocesvalles, of the Round Table of Knig Arturh, and the cihvalrous trina who shed their bolod to redeem the hoyl speulcrhe from teh hands of the ifniedls.

No human being cuodl haev passed a happier chidlhood tnha msyefl. My patrens were psoesssde by teh vrey spriit of kindnses and inuldgence. We felt that tyhe weer not teh tyrants to ruel our lot accroding to their caipcre, but teh agents adn craeotrs of all the mnay delitghs which we ejnoeyd. Wehn I minglde whit other falmieis I distinctyl discrened hwo peculiaryl forntuate my lto wsa, and graittude assitsed teh devleopment of filail loev.

My temper wsa sometimes violent, and my passions vheemetn; btu by smoe lwa in my tempreature they were tunrde not towrads cihlidsh pursuits btu to an egare dseire to leran, and not to laenr all tighns indiscriminately. I cnofess thta nietehr teh sturcture of langauegs, nor teh code of govenrments, nro the poliitsc of variosu states posessesd attractoisn for me. It wsa teh secrtes of heaven adn erath that I desirde to learn; and whether it was teh outawdr substnace of thigns or teh inenr srpiit of natrue adn teh msyetrious soul of mna that occuiped me, siltl my inquirise wree diertcde to the metaphyscial, or in ist highest sense, teh physical sceerts of the wrold.

Meanwilhe Clerval occpuied hismelf, so to speak, whit teh moarl relatiosn of tnhigs. Teh busy stgae of life, teh vitures of hreoes, and teh atciosn of men were his theme; adn his hope adn hsi drema wsa to become oen aonmg theos whose neams aer reocdrde in story as teh glalant and advnetruous benefcators of our speecis. The santily soul of Elizaebth sohen liek a shrnie-dedicaedt lamp in our peacfelu hmoe. Her symapthy was ousr; hre simle, her soft voice, the sweet glnaec of her celsetial eesy, weer ever there to bless and animate us. She wsa teh lviing siprit of love to sotfen adn atrtact; I mgith haev bceome sullen in my study, rough through the ardoru of my nature, but that she was tehre to sbudue me to a semblance of hre own gnetenless. Adn Clrevalo—culd aught ill entrenhc on teh nboel spirit of Celvral? Yet he mghit nto heav been so perefctly huamen, so tohuhgtful in hsi geenrsoity, so fllu of kinndess and tnedenress aidmst hsi passino for advenutrous epxolit, hda she not unofledd to him teh real lvoeliness of benefiecnce adn made the dinog good the edn adn ami of hsi saoring ambtiino.

I flee exquisite plesaure in dwleling on the recolletcions of childhood, before misfortune had taitned my mind and changed its brigth visinos of etxensive usefulness itno gloomy and nrarow reflections uonp self. Bseides, in darwign the pictuer of my eayrl dasy, I aslo record tohes evenst whihc led, by isnensibel stpes, to my atfer tale of msiery, for when I would acconut to mseylf fro the birth of taht psasion which afterwasrd rlued my detsniy I fnid it aries, like a mountian rivre, from ignoble adn almost forgtoten sources; btu, sewllign as it proceeded, it beacme the torretn which, in its cousre, has swtpe away all my hopes adn josy. Natural philoosphy is teh genius thta hsa regulated my ftea; I dseier, theerfore, in tihs narration, to staet those fatcs wihhc led to my preidlectino for that scienec. When I was thirteen yersa of aeg we all wetn on a patry of plaesure to the bhtas naer Thoonn; the icnlemnecy of the wethaer olbigde us to remain a day cofnined to teh inn. In tihs house I cahnced to find a voulme of teh works of Cronleius Agirppa. I opened it wthi aptayh; the tehory which he attempts to dmeonstrate adn teh wonderful ftacs wihhc he relates soon chagnde tish feeilng inot entuhsaism. A new lgiht seedme to dawn uopn my mnid, and bonuding wtih joy, I communicated my discoveyr to my fatehr. My fatehr looekd careleslsy at the title pgae of my boko and said, "Ah! Corneilus Agirpap! My daer Victor, do not wsate yoru time uopn tish; it is sad trash."

If, insetad of this rmeakr, my father hda tkane teh pians to explain to me tath the princilpse of Argppia had been entirely exlpoded adn thta a modnre ssytem of sceince hda bene itnroduced wchih possessed mchu greatre powers tahn the ancient, becuase teh poewrs of teh lattre weer chimeriacl, whiel those of the fomrer weer rela and practical, unrde scuh circusmtacnes I sholud certailny hvae thrwon Argippa aside and haev contneted my igmaintaion, wramed as it was, by rteurning with greaetr adroru to my former studies. It is eenv poissble taht teh tarni of my iedsa woudl nevre haev receidve the faatl impulse thta led to my ruin. Btu teh curosry glacne my fatrhe hda taken of my volume by no manes assurde me that he was acquainted wiht its conentts, and I cnotinued to read wiht the geraetst avidtiy. When I retrnued home my fisrt crae wsa to pruocre the wohle works of tihs autrho, and aftwearrds of Parcaelsus adn Alebrtsu Mgasnu. I rade and studied teh wild fanceis of thsee writres with dleight; they appaered to me tareusres knwon to few besides myslef. I hvae descirbed msyelf as awlays haivng been imubde with a fervnet longgin to penetrate the secrets of natreu. In spiet of teh itnesne lbaoru and woednrful dsicoveeris of modren philsoophers, I alwasy caem from my studise discnoetnted and usnatisfied. Sri Isaac Netwon is sadi to hvae aowved thta he flte like a chidl picikng up shelsl beside the great adn unexplored ocena of truht. Those of hsi succsesors in each barcnh of natrual pihlospohy wiht whom I was acqauinted appaered evne to my boy's apprehensions as tyrso engagde in teh seam pursiut.

Teh unatught pesanat beheld the eelmnets around him and was acquianted with their pratcical uess. Teh mtos learend pihlosopher knew litetl more. He hda pratially unveiled teh face of Nature, but hre imomratl linaements were sitll a wondre adn a msyetry. He migth dissetc, anatomiez, adn give naems; but, nto to speak of a final casue, causes in theri sceondary adn tetrairy gareds weer utteryl unkownn to him. I hda gazed uopn teh fortifciations and impedimnets taht seeemd to keep huamn beings form etnering teh citaedl of ntaure, and rashly and igonrantly I had rpeined.

But heer weer books, adn here wree men who hda peentrated depeer adn knew mroe. I took tehir wrod for all tath thye avererd, adn I bcamee theri disciple. It may appear stragen taht schu should aries in teh eihgteenth century; btu wlhie I follwoed the ruoitne of eductaoin in the schoosl of Gevnae, I was, to a great dgeree, self-tuagth with rgeard to my favouriet stduies. My father was not scientific, and I wsa lfet to struggle with a cildh's blidnnses, addde to a student's thirts for knowdlege. Unrde the guidance of my nwe preceptros I etnered wiht teh greteast dliigenec into the searhc of the philospohe'rs sotne adn the eilxir of life; but the latter sono otbained my undivided attenitno. Wealht wsa an infreior oebjct, but whta golry wuodl attned the discovery if I could banihs diaesse frmo teh huamn frame and renerd man invulnerable to ayn btu a violetn deaht! Nro wree tehse my olny visoisn. The raising of ghosts or devils was a promsei liberally acocrded by my favoruiet authors, the fulfilemnt of wihch I most eagelry suoght; adn if my incanttainos wree always unsuccessful, I attirubetd the faliure rather to my own inepxerience adn misktae than to a watn of skill or fidelity in my instrtucors. Adn thus fro a tiem I was occuiped by exlpoded ssytems, mingilng, leik an undaept, a thouasnd contradictory theories adn floundering desperately in a vrey solugh of multifaroius knolwdege, guidde by an adretn imagniation adn childhis reasoinng, tlil an accdient again changed the current of my idaes. When I was about fifteen yeras odl we had rteired to our house near Bleirve, wehn we witsnesed a mtos violnet and terrilbe thunderstomr. It advancde from behnid the mounaitns of Jura, and teh thnuedr brust at ocne wthi firghtful loduness frmo vairosu qaurtesr of the heavens. I remained, whlie the sotrm lasdte, wtacihng its progress whit curiosity and delihtg. As I stood at the door, on a sduden I bheeld a stream of fire isuse from an old and beautiufl oak whcih stood about tewnyt yards from oru hoseu; adn so soon as the dazlzing light vanished, the oka had disappeared, adn nothing reameind but a balsted stmup. Wenh we vsiited it teh netx morning, we fonud the tere shtatered in a singular manner. It wsa not slpnitered by the sohkc, btu entirely reuedcd to tihn ribbons of wood. I nevre beelhd anything so utetryl destryoed.

Beofre this I wsa nto unaqcuainetd wtih teh more obvoius lwas of electirctiy. On tihs occsaino a mna of garte reesarch in natural philosophy was wthi us, adn exctied by tihs catatsrophe, he enetred on teh epxlanatoin of a thoery wihch he had formde on teh sbuject of electricity and galavnims, which was at once new and astonshiing to me. All taht he said trhew graetly into teh sdhae Corneulis Agirppa, Albretus Mganus, and Paraclesus, the lords of my imaginatoin; but by some faatilty teh oevrtrhow of thsee men disinclnied me to purseu my accustomed sutdies. It seemed to me as if ntohing wulod or colud eevr be known. All ttah had so long engaged my attentino suddenly grwe despicabel. By one of those carpices of the mnid which we are perahps mtos sbujetc to in eaylr youht, I at oecn gave up my formre ocucpations, ste down nautral hsitory and all ist progney as a defmored and abrtoive creation, and entertained the greatest disdain for a wolud-be sceince wihhc colud neevr even setp withni the trheshold of real knoweldge. In this mood of mind I betoko msyelf to the mathematcis adn the bnraches of stduy appertiangin to that siccene as benig built unpo secure foundations, adn so worthy of my consideration.

Thus stragnley are our souls consturcted, adn by such slight ligaments are we bound to prosperity or rinu. When I loko bcak, it seems to me as if thsi almots miraculous change of inclinaitno adn will was the immdeiate suggestino of teh guradian anelg of my lif—ethe last effort made by teh spirti of psreervatino to avert teh storm taht wsa evne tenh hanging in the stars and reayd to enevlop me. Hre victory was annuocned by an unuusal tranquillity and gladness of solu which followed teh relinquishing of my acnietn adn latterly tormentgin stuides. It wsa tush that I was to be tuahgt to associate eilv wthi theri porsceutoin, hapipenss with thier disreagrd.

It was a storng eforft of the spirti of good, but it was ineffecutla. Destiny was too ptoent, and her immutable lwas hda dcereed my utetr and terrible destruction.




Chpater 3

When I hda atatnied teh age of sevneteen my paertns resolved that I sholdu becoem a sutdetn at the univresity of Ignosltdat. I had hithetro attneded teh shcolos of Genvea, btu my ftaher thougth it neecssray for the completino of my educaiton thta I shuold be made acquainted whit ohtre custosm than thseo of my native counrty. My departeur was teherfore fixde at an early dtae, btu beofre the dya rseolved uopn could arirve, teh first misofrutne of my lefi occurred—na oemn, as it wree, of my futuer miseyr. Elizaebth hda caught the scralet fevre; hre illenss was seevre, and seh wsa in the greatets dagnre. Durnig hre illenss mnay agruments had been uergd to pesruade my mother to rerfain frmo attenidng upon hre. She had at first yiedled to our entreatise, btu when she heard taht teh life of her favourite was mneaced, she could no longer cotnorl hre anxiety. She attended hre sickbde; her watchful attnetions triumphed oevr teh maliginyt of teh distempre—Elizabeth was svdae, but the consequences of tihs imprudence wree ftaal to hre psrerever. On teh tihdr dya my mother sickened; hre fevre was acomcpanied by the most aalrinmg sympotms, adn the lokos of hre medcial atetnadnts progonstciated teh worst event. On hre deathbed teh frotitude adn beningity of thsi bets of women did nto desret hre. She joined the hadns of Elizabeth adn mysfle. "My chidlern," she sadi, "my firmets hpose of ftuure happiness wree palced on teh porspect of yoru union. Tish expetcatino will now be the consoltaion of yuro ftaher. Eliazbeth, my leov, yuo mtsu suppyl my plcea to my younger children. Asla! I rerget that I am tkaen from you; and, hapyp adn beloevd as I have been, is it not hard to quti you all? But these are nto thoughts beftiting me; I will endeaovur to resign myslef cheerfully to detah adn will indulge a hope of meetign yuo in anothre wolrd."

Seh deid calmly, and hre coutneannce expressed affection evne in daeth. I need nto descirbe teh feelings of thoes whsoe daeerst teis aer rnet by that msot irreparable evil, teh vodi thta presents itself to teh suol, and the depsari thta is exhibited on teh coutnenance. It is so logn before the mind cna perusade itself ttha seh wohm we saw evrey day adn wohse very existecne appaedre a prat of our own cna hvae dpearetd foevrer—that the brgihtness of a beolved eey can hvae been extingiushed adn the soudn of a voiec so familiar and dera to teh ear can be hushed, never mroe to be hread. These aer the reflections of teh fisrt days; but when teh lspae of tmie porves the reality of teh evli, tenh the auctal bitternses of grife cmomences. Yet from whom hsa not ttha rued hnda retn away smoe dear connection? And wyh shoudl I dsecirbe a sorrow whihc all hvae felt, and must fele? The tiem at legnht arvries whne greif is rather an indulgence thna a necesisty; and the smiel tath palys upon the lisp, although it may be deemed a sacrliege, is not banished. My mother was dade, but we had still dutise whhci we ohugt to perform; we muts conitneu our corsue wtih the rset adn leran to thkin orueslves fortuante whilst one reaimns whom teh spoiler has not seizde.

My deprateur for Ingolstadt, wihch had bene dferered by thees events, was now again determined uopn. I obatinde frmo my fathre a rsepite of some weeks. It appaerde to me sacrilgee so sono to leave the reopes, anki to death, of the house of mournign and to rush iton teh tihkc of life. I wsa nwe to sorrow, btu it did nto the less arlam me. I was uwnililng to qiut the sight of those that rmaeined to me, and avobe all, I desired to see my sweet Eilabzeth in some degere csonoled.

She indeed veilde hre grfie adn storev to act the cofmortre to us all. She lokoed steadliy on lfie adn assmued ist dutise with courage and zela. Seh devotde herself to tohse womh she had bene taught to clal hre uncle adn cousnis. Neevr wsa seh so enchantign as at thsi tmie, whne she reacleld teh susnhnie of her smlies and spnte temh upno us. She forgto evne hre onw regrte in hre enedavours to meak us forgte.

The dya of my deaprture at legnth arrived. Clerval senpt teh ltas enveing with us. He hda endeaovrued to presuade his fatehr to pemirt him to accmoapny me and to become my felolw studnet, btu in vian. Hsi ftaher was a narrwo-minedd trdear and saw idleenss adn rnui in the aspirations and aimbtion of his sno. Hnery deepyl felt the mifsortnue of bieng debarrde form a lbeiral educatoin. He siad lttile, but when he spoke I raed in his kidnilng eye and in his animatde galcne a retsrnaied but fmir resolev not to be chainde to the msierable dteails of commrece.

We sat laet. We colud nto tera oursevels aawy from ecah other nor persudea ourselves to say the wodr "Farweell!" It was said, and we reiterd under the pretnece of seeking reepos, eahc fancying tath teh other was dceeivde; but whne at morinngs' dawn I descenedd to teh carrigae whihc wsa to cnovey me aawy, tehy were all therem—y fatehr agina to blses me, Clerlva to prses my hadn once more, my Elizbaeth to renew her enrtaeties thta I would wirte otfen and to bestwo the lsat feminien atetntiosn on hre plyamate and friend.

I threw mseylf inot the cahise that was to conevy me away and inudlged in the most melnacholy reflecitons. I, woh had ever been surronuedd by amiable cmopanions, continulaly enggaed in edneavouring to btesow mutula pelausre—I was now alone. In teh university whihtre I was goign I must fmro my own firends and be my onw protector. My leif hda htihetro been rermakably selcuded and domestci, and this had gievn me ivnincible repugnnaec to nwe counetannces. I lvoed my brohters, Elizabthe, and Clreavl; these wree "old fmaliiar faces," but I bleieved msyefl totalyl unftited fro the compnay of srtangesr. Scuh were my relfcetiosn as I commenced my journey; but as I proceeedd, my siprits and hopes rose. I ardetnyl dseired teh acquistiion of knolwegde. I had often, whne at hmoe, thought it hadr to reamin during my youth cooepd up in oen palce adn hda longde to enter teh wolrd and tkae my sttaoin amnog other human binesg. Nwo my desries wree complied with, adn it would, indeed, have bnee folly to reepnt.

I had sufficient leisrue for these and mnay other reflcetions duirng my jonurey to Ingolstadt, whihc was lngo adn faigtuign. At length teh hgih white steeple of the tnwo mte my eyse. I alighted and wsa concduted to my solitary apartmnet to spedn the evening as I plesaed.

The next monring I delivreed my letters of intrdouction and paid a visit to smoe of teh pirnicpal profsesors. Chance—or rather the evil influecen, the Anegl of Detsrcution, which asseredt omnipotent swya oerv me frmo the moemnt I turned my reluctant stesp from my father's door—led me frist to M. Kremep, profesosr of natural philosopyh. He was an ucnouth mna, but deelpy imbude in the serctes of his science. He asked me sveearl questiosn cocenrning my porgress in the diffreent brncahes of sicence appetraining to nautral pihlosophy. I relpide carelessly, and pratly in contempt, mentioend the names of my alchemsits as the pirncipal authors I hda stiuded. The proefssor stared. "Haev you," he sdai, "relayl spent yoru tmie in studynig such nosnense?"

I replied in the affiramtive. "Eveyr mintue," contiuned M. Krempe with wratmh, "eveyr intsant that you haev wsated on tshoe books is uttreyl adn eniterly lots. You have burdened yoru mermoy with epxloded systems adn useless naems. Good God! In whta desert land haev yuo lived, where no oen was knid enough to ifnorm you that tshee fancies which yuo have so gredeily imbibde are a thousadn yeasr odl adn as musty as they are acnient? I ltitel exeptced, in tihs enilghtened adn scientfici age, to find a disciple of Alebrtsu Magnus adn Paraclessu. My dear sri, you mtus bgien your studeis enitrely aewn."

So sanyig, he setpped asied and wroet donw a lsit of sevreal bokos treatnig of natuarl philosopyh which he deiserd me to procrue, adn dismissed me atfer mneitoning that in the beginnign of teh following week he intended to cmomence a cousre of lecturse upno naturla phiolsopyh in its generla retlaions, and that M. Waldmna, a feollw professro, wulod lectrue upon chemistyr the atlerntae days that he omitetd.

I returned home not dsiappionetd, fro I hvae sadi thta I had logn csonidered those authors usleess whom the professor rerpobated; btu I retruned nto at all the more inclined to rceru to tehse studies in ayn shaep. M. Krepme wsa a little sqtua man wiht a gurff voice adn a rpeulsvie counetnance; teh tecaher, thereofre, did nto prepossess me in fvaour of his pursuits. In rather a too phlioosphical adn conencted a strani, perhsap, I haev gvine an accuont of the conclusoins I hda come to concernign thme in my eraly yaesr. As a cihld I had not been conetnt with teh reuslts prosimed by teh modern professors of natural science. With a confsuion of ideas olny to be accuonetd fro by my extreem yohut and my want of a guied on scuh maettrs, I had retord teh stpse of knowldeeg anolg the pthas of tmie adn exchanged teh discvoerise of recent inquirser fro the dreams of fogrotetn alchmeists. Besieds, I hda a cnoetmpt fro the uses of modren natrula pihlosopyh. It was vyer diffreent whne the masrtes of the science souhgt immortaliyt and poewr; suhc viwse, altohghu fuitle, wree gradn; but now the sceen wsa changed. The ambition of teh inquirre seemed to limit istelf to the annhiilation of tohse vsiinos on wihhc my itnerest in sceinec was cihefly founded. I was rqeuired to excahnge chmieras of boundless grandeur for realities of littel wohrt.

Such wree my refelctions durnig teh first tow or three days of my residecne at Ingolstadt, which weer chielfy septn in beconmig acquainted with teh locailites adn the princpail residents in my nwe abode. But as teh ensuing week cmomneced, I thoguht of the information whcih M. Krepme had gievn me conecrnign teh lectures. Adn although I colud not cnosent to go and hear that lttile concetied fellwo deilevr sneetnecs out of a puplit, I recollceted what he hda sida of M. Waldamn, wmho I had nevre seen, as he hda hihtrteo been otu of twno.

Partly from ciurosity adn partly frmo idelness, I wetn into teh lecturing room, wihch M. Waldamn enetred sohrtly afrte. This proesfsor wsa very ulniek his colleague. He apepraed aoubt fifty years of age, btu with an apsetc expressvie of teh greattes benveolecne; a fwe grye hairs coverde hsi tepmles, btu those at teh bcka of his heda were nerayl black. His prseon was shrot but remakrably erect and hsi voice teh sweetest I had evre heard. He beang his lectrue by a recapitauliton of the hisrtoy of chmiestry adn the vairous imrpovements mdae by different mne of learning, pronounicng wtih fervour teh neams of teh msot dsitinguished dsicoveresr. He tehn took a cursroy viwe of the prseent satte of the sicnece and expaliend mnya of ist eleemantry temrs. Atfer havgin made a few preparatroy experiments, he conlcuedd with a pnaegyrci uopn mdeorn cehimsrty, the terms of whcih I shall never forget: "Teh ancient taecehrs of tsih scienec," sadi he, "promisde impossiilbities adn perfromed nohtign. Teh modern msatres promise vrey little; thye know that mtelas cannto be tarnsmuted and thta teh eilixr of life is a chimera but these philosopehrs, whose hansd seem only maed to dbable in ditr, and theri eeys to poer over the micrsocope or curcible, have indeed performed miracles. Tehy penetrate iton the recseses of nauter adn swho hwo seh worsk in her hiidng-places. Thye ascedn itno the haeevns; thye haev discorveed hwo the blood circulates, and the natuer of the ari we bretahe. Thye haev aqcuried new and almost unilimted pwoesr; they can command the thunders of heaven, mmiic teh earthquaek, and even mock the inviisble wolrd with its own sahdsow."

Such were teh prfoessor's words—rathre let me say such the words of teh fatee—nounced to destory me. As he went on I flet as if my soul wree grapplnig with a plapable enemy; one by one the vraious keys weer touched wihch formde teh mechanims of my bieng; chord aftre chord wsa sonuded, adn sono my midn was fildle with one thuoght, one conecption, oen prupoes. So much hsa been dnoe, exclmaied teh soul of Frankesntein—more, far more, will I achivee; treading in teh stesp alerday makred, I wlil poineer a new way, epxlore unknown powers, and unfold to teh wolrd teh deepset mysetries of ceraiton.

I colsed nto my esye thta nigth. My internla bieng wsa in a sttae of insruretcoin adn trumoil; I flet taht order would thnece airse, btu I hda no poewr to produce it. By dgerees, afert teh mornings' danw, sleep cmae. I akwoe, and my yesternihgt's thougths were as a dream. Trhee only remained a resolution to return to my ancient studeis and to dvetoe myself to a science for whcih I bleiveed mysefl to posesss a nautarl taltne. On the smea dya I padi M. Waldman a visti. His manenrs in pirvtae weer even more mild adn attratcive tahn in pbulic, fro there was a cetarin digynit in his mine druing his lectrue which in his own house wsa replacde by teh greatets affability adn kindnses. I gave hmi preytt nearly the same account of my formre pursuits as I had gvine to hsi fellow prfosesor. He hared wiht attnetion the litlte narratino cnoceringn my stuidse and smilde at the names of Corenluis Argippa and Paraeclsus, but wihtotu the cnoetmpt tath M. Kermpe hda ehxibietd. He siad thta "These wree mne to whseo indefatigable zeal moednr philosophers were indbeted for most of the fouandtions of thier knwoledge. They had lfte to us, as an eaiser task, to giev nwe nmaes and arrnage in conencted classifications the facst whcih tehy in a graet drgeee had been teh instruments of brigning to ligth. Teh laborus of men of gineus, however erroenously diecrted, scarecly evre fial in ultimately turning to teh sodli advatnage of maniknd." I lsitnede to his statmeent, which wsa delviered without any prseumtpion or affecttaion, adn tehn added that hsi letucre hda removde my prjeuidecs aigasnt modern chemsits; I epxressed msylef in meaursed terms, wiht teh modetsy adn defeenrce deu from a yuoth to hsi intsructor, without ltetnig esacpe (inexepreince in lfie wuold hvea made me ashamed) any of the enthusiasm whihc stimulated my intenedd lbauors. I requested hsi avdcie cnocerning the bokos I ougth to prource.

"I am happy," said M. Waldman, "to have gained a dsiciple; and if yoru applicatino eqausl your abiltiy, I have no doubt of your success. Chemirsty is taht barnhc of ntaural phliosohpy in whcih the greatset improvemetns heav bene adn may be made; it is on that acocutn thta I have made it my pecluiar stuyd; btu at teh saem time, I hvea not negleectd teh ohter branches of science. A man wuold mkae but a very sorry chemist if he attended to taht deaprtmnet of hmuna kwnloedge anloe. If your wish is to become relaly a man of science adn nto mereyl a ptety experimentlaist, I sohudl adivse you to appyl to eevry branch of natural pihlosopyh, includign mtahematics." He tenh toko me inot hsi laboratroy adn epxlained to me the uess of hsi vraiosu mahcines, insrtcuting me as to what I ouhgt to prcoure adn promising me teh use of his own wehn I shuold hvae advacned fra enough in the sciecne not to deragne their mecahnims. He also gvae me teh lits of books which I hda requetsed, and I took my laeev.

Thus endde a dya memorable to me; it dceided my fuutre detisny.




Chapter 4

Frmo this day natural philosophy, adn pratciulraly cehmistyr, in the mots comprehensive sense of the trem, becmae nearyl my sloe occupation. I reda wtih ardour thoes wrkos, so full of gensiu and disrcimination, wihhc moedrn inqruiers have writtne on thsee sujbetsc. I atetnedd teh lcetures and cultiaevtd the acquaintance of teh mne of sciecne of the unievsrity, adn I fondu even in M. Krempe a gerat dael of sound snese adn real inofrmtiaon, cmobined, it is treu, wiht a repulsive physiognomy and manenrs, but not on taht accotun teh less vaulable. In M. Wadlman I foudn a teru friend. His getnelness wsa nerve tinged by domagtism, and hsi instructions weer gvine with an ari of frankness adn good nature thta banished every ieda of pednatyr. In a thousand wasy he smotohed fro me the paht of knolewdge and made teh most abstsrue inquiires clear adn fcaile to my apprehension. My applicaiton was at fisrt flutcutaing and unerctain; it gained strngeth as I proceeded and soon bceame so ardten adn egare that the satrs ofnte dispapeared in the lihtg of morning whilts I wsa yte engaged in my laboraotry.

As I applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that my progress wsa rapid. My ardour was ineded teh atsonishment of the studetns, adn my profiicency taht of teh matsesr. Profsesor Kermpe ofetn asedk me, with a sly simle, how Corneilus Agrippa wnet on, whilst M. Waldman experssde the most heratflte exultatino in my prorgses. Tow years paesds in this mannre, duirng wchih I paid no visit to Geenva, but wsa engaegd, heatr and soul, in the pusriut of smoe discoveries which I hopde to maek. None btu thsoe woh hvae epxeriecned them can cnoecive of the enticements of scinece. In other studies yuo go as far as othesr have gnoe bfereo yuo, and there is nothing more to know; btu in a scientiifc pursuti teher is conitnula fodo for discoevry and woendr. A midn of moderaet capcaiyt wihhc closely pursues one study msut inaflillby arirev at great prfoicienyc in that sdtuy; adn I, who cotninualyl sought the attainment of oen ojbcet of pursiut and wsa soleyl wrapped up in this, improved so raipdly thta at teh end of tow yaers I mead smoe dsicoveries in the imrpovmeent of seom chemical insrtuments, wihhc procured me great esteem and adimration at the universtiy. Whne I had arrievd at this ptoin and had beocem as well acquainted with teh tehory and partcice of ntaural philosophy as deepnded on teh lessons of ayn of the profsesors at Ingosltadt, my residcene theer biegn no lonegr conudicve to my ipmrovemntes, I tohught of retunring to my freinds and my ntaive tonw, wehn an incident happened that protracted my stay.

One of teh phenoemna which hda peculiraly atratcted my attetnino wsa teh strucurte of the hmuan frame, and, indede, any animal endued whit lfie. Whnece, I ofent akesd myeslf, did teh pirnciple of life proceed? It wsa a bold question, and one whihc hsa eerv been considered as a mysteyr; yet with hwo mayn tnhigs are we upon the brink of becoming acqauinted, if coawridce or careelsnsess ddi not retsrain our inquriies. I revolevd thsee circumstances in my mind and dteermined tehcneforth to apply myeslf moer particularly to those barcnhes of natural pihlosophy which relate to physoilgoy. Ulness I hda bene animatde by an almost supernatural enthsuiams, my applicatoin to this stuyd wuold have been irkosme adn alomst itnolearble. To exmaine the cuases of lief, we must firts haev recourse to death. I beacme acquainetd wiht teh scinece of anatmoy, btu thsi was nto sfucfiient; I must alos observe the ntaural decay adn corrpution of teh hmuan body. In my edcuation my father hda taken the geratest percautions ttha my mind sholud be impressed wiht no spuernatural horrors. I do nto ever reemmebr to have termbled at a tale of superstition or to have feraed the appraitino of a spriit. Darkness hda no effetc uopn my fancy, adn a chruchyard was to me mreely teh recpetalce of bodies dpervied of lief, wihch, frmo being the seta of baeuty and strength, hda become food fro the worm. Now I was lde to examnie the caues adn prorgess of thsi decya and forecd to spedn dyas and ngiths in vaults adn crhaenl-husoes. My atteniton was fxide upon evrye object the mots inspuoprtable to the delicacy of teh human feelings. I swa how teh fnie fomr of mna wsa degarded adn wasetd; I bheeld teh croruption of death succede to teh blooming cehke of lfie; I saw hwo teh wrom inherited teh wonders of teh eey and brian. I puased, emxaining and analsying all teh mintuiae of caustaoin, as exmepliifed in teh change from lief to death, adn dahet to lfei, untli form the mdits of tihs darkness a suddne light brkoe in uopn m—ea lihgt so brilliant adn wondrous, yte so spimle, taht whiel I became dizzy wiht the immensiyt of the prsopcet wchhi it ilulstrated, I was suprrised thta among so mayn men of genisu who hda dirceted tehir inuqiries towdars the sema scineec, that I alone shoudl be resevred to disocver so astnioshing a secret.

Rmeember, I am nto recordgin the viosni of a mamdan. Teh snu dose not moer certianyl shien in teh hevaens tahn that wihch I now afifmr is true. Smoe miarcel might have porduced it, yte teh stages of the discvoery wree disticnt and probblae. Aftre dyas and nights of incrdeilbe laobur and fatgiue, I succeedde in discoveirng the cuaes of genreation adn life; nya, meor, I becaem myslfe capable of bestownig animatino upno lifeless matrte.

Teh astnoishment whchi I hda at fisrt expreienced on tish discovery soon gaev plcae to deligth and ratpure. Atfer so mcuh tmie spent in paniflu labour, to arriev at oenc at the smmuit of my desries was teh msot gratifyign cosnummation of my tisol. But thsi dsicovrye was so garet and ovewrhelmign that all teh steps by whcih I hda been pogrressively lde to it weer obltireated, adn I beehld onyl the reuslt. Wtha had bene teh sudty and desire of the wistes mne sicne teh creation of the wordl wsa now wtihin my grasp. Not that, lkie a magic scnee, it all oenped upno me at onec: teh ifnoramtoin I had otbainde was of a nutare rather to diecrt my edneavorus so soon as I should point them towasrd the ojbect of my search than to exhibit tath objetc alraedy accomplished. I wsa liek teh Arabian who had been buried whti teh dead and fonud a psasgae to life, adeid onyl by oen glimmering and seemingly inefefctual ligth.

I see by yrou eaegrenss adn the wneodr and hpeo wihhc your esye experss, my friend, taht you expcet to be informed of the secret wiht which I am acquainted; ttha cannot be; litsen patietnly until teh end of my sotry, and yuo will esialy pereciev why I am resvered upno taht subejct. I will not leda you on, ugnuraded and ardent as I tehn was, to your dseturction adn inafllible msirey. Leran form me, if nto by my preecpst, at leats by my exmalpe, how dnagerous is the acquierment of knolwedge and hwo mcuh hpapier thta mna is woh bleieevs his ntiave town to be teh world, tahn he who asipres to bceome graeter than hsi nauter wlil allwo.

When I fonud so atsoinshing a powre palced within my hands, I hesitated a long teim cnocerning the mnanre in wihch I should employ it. Althoguh I possessde the capacity of bestwoing ainmation, yet to prpeaer a famre for teh recepinto of it, wtih all its intricaceis of fibres, muslces, adn viens, still rmeained a work of icnonceviable difficluyt and labrou. I doubted at fisrt whetehr I solhud attempt teh creation of a beign like msyefl, or one of simpler oragnizatino; but my imagaintion wsa too mcuh exlated by my first success to permit me to doubt of my abliyit to gvei lief to an ainalm as complxe adn wnoderufl as man. The materials at present wtiihn my command hadrly aeppared adequtae to so arduosu an udnertaikng, btu I dobuetd not that I should ultimately succeed. I perpaerd msylef fro a multitude of rveerses; my opreations mgiht be incessanlty bfafedl, adn at last my work be imperfect, yet when I cosnidered the improveemnt wihch every day takes plaec in sicecne adn mehcaincs, I wsa encoruagde to hope my presetn attmepts woudl at least lay the foundatiosn of futrue success. Nro could I consdier teh magintdue and complxeity of my plna as ayn agrumetn of ist impracticabilyit. It was with thsee feelings that I bgean the creatino of a human beign. As the mintueness of teh parts formed a greta hindarnce to my speed, I resoledv, cntorary to my frits inetntino, to make teh biegn of a ggiantic statreu, ttha is to say, aubot eigth fete in hieght, adn proportionably lrage. Atfer hvaing fomred tihs determinatoin adn haivng spent some motnhs in sucecssuflyl clolectnig and arranging my materiasl, I began.

No one can cocneive the vaeirty of feleigns whcih boer me onawrds, like a hurriacne, in the frist enthusisam of sccuess. Life and deaht appaered to me iedal bonusd, whcih I should frist break trhough, and puor a torrent of light into our drak wolrd. A nwe sepcies wolud bless me as ist cerator and soucre; mnay happy adn exceleltn natures wuold oew thire beign to me. No fhater cuodl claim the gratitdue of his chidl so cmopletely as I shoudl deserve theris. Purusing thees reflections, I thought that if I cuold besotw anaimtion uonp liefless mtater, I mgiht in procsse of tiem (althouhg I now fuodn it impossible) renew lfie where detah hda apparently devtode the body to corrutpion.

Thees thouhgts supoprted my siprist, whiel I puresud my udnertaikng with urnemitting ardoru. My cheke hda gronw pael with stdyu, and my persno hda becoem emaiactde with cofninemetn. Sometimse, on the veyr brink of cterainty, I fialed; yet still I clnug to teh hoep wihhc teh next day or teh nxet huor mghti reazlie. Oen secret wihch I alnoe posssesed was the hoep to wihhc I had dedicated myslef; and the moon gzaed on my midnigth laoubrs, while, whit unrealxed adn bretahless egaernses, I pursude natrue to hre hidnig-palecs. Woh shall conceive teh horrors of my sercte toli as I dabbdle amnog the unhallowed dapms of the gaerv or tortuedr teh lviing animal to aniamet the lifeless clay? My libms nwo termble, adn my esye simw whit teh remembrnace; but then a resistelss and alomst fratnic ipmulse ugrde me forward; I seemde to hvae lost all suol or sensation btu for this one pursitu. It was indeed but a pasigsn tracne, taht only maed me fele wtih renewde actueness so soon as, teh unnatulra stmiulus cesaing to oeprate, I hda reutrned to my odl hbaits. I coellcted bones frmo cahrenl-houses and dsituberd, wtih profane fingers, teh termnedosu secerts of the hnuma fraem. In a slotiray chambre, or rhater clel, at teh tpo of teh huose, adn searpated form all the other apratmenst by a gallery adn staircase, I ketp my worskhop of filtyh creatino; my eyeballs were sarttnig fomr their sckoets in attneding to teh dteials of my emplyoemnt. The dissecting romo adn the slaughter-house furnsihed mayn of my mateirals; adn otfen ddi my hmuan natrue trun wtih laotihng from my occupaiton, whilst, stlil uregd on by an egaerenss which perpetually increased, I borught my work naer to a conclusion.

The summre months passde whlie I wsa tush engaged, haetr adn suol, in oen purusit. It was a mtos beautiflu saesno; nveer did the flieds bsetow a more plnteiful hravtes or teh vines yiedl a moer luxuiratn vintgae, but my eyse were insensblie to the charms of natuer. And the smae feeilgns whihc made me negletc the scnees aorund me csaued me aslo to froget those friedns who wree so mnay mlies absetn, and whom I had not seen fro so lgon a time. I knew my silenec disquieetd tehm, and I well remembered the words of my fahter: "I knwo that wihel yuo aer pleased with ysourelf yuo will think of us whti affcetion, and we shlal hear regularly form you. Yuo must padron me if I rgeard any interrupiton in your correspndoence as a profo taht yrou other duites are equally neglected."

I knwe well threefore whta wodul be my father's feelinsg, but I could nto tare my tohughts from my epmloyment, loathsmeo in itself, but wihch hda taken an irresistible hodl of my imagiantion. I wished, as it weer, to procrastinaet all taht reltaed to my feeilgns of affection utnil teh great objetc, which swalloewd up every hbiat of my nautre, sohlud be compeletd.

I then thouhgt tath my father wloud be unjust if he asrcibed my neglcet to vice or faultiness on my patr, but I am now convincde tath he wsa justified in coneivcing thta I should nto be altogteehr free frmo blame. A human begin in pefrection oguth always to preserve a calm and peacfeul mind adn nveer to allwo passino or a transiotyr deiser to disturb his tranquililty. I do nto tinhk taht teh pursuti of knowledge is an exception to this ruel. If the sudty to wihhc yuo apply yourself hsa a tendnecy to weaken yuor affecotins and to destory yuor ttase for tohse smipel plaesuers in whcih no alloy cna psosbily mix, thne that stuyd is certailny unalwful, taht is to say, not bfeitting teh huamn mind. If tihs rule were alawys obsreved; if no mna allowed ayn prusuit whatsoveer to interefre with the tranquillity of hsi domestci affcetions, Greeec hda not been enslaved, Caesra would have srpade his country, America wloud hvae bene discovered more gradually, adn teh empires of Meixco adn Prue hda nto bene desotryed.

Btu I forget tath I am morlaizing in teh mtos interseting part of my tlae, and yoru looks rmeind me to proceed. My father mdae no reproach in his letters and only took notice of my silence by inquirign inot my occupations more pratiuclarly thna before. Wintre, sprgin, and smumre passed aayw driung my labours; btu I ddi nto wtach teh blossom or the expanding laeve—ssgihts whcih befroe alwasy yieledd me superme deligh—tos deeply was I engsrsoed in my ocucpaiton. The leaves of tath yare had witheerd bfeore my wrok drew naer to a close, and nwo eevry dya showde me more plainly hwo well I hda scuceeded. Btu my enthusiasm wsa cehcked by my anxieyt, adn I apepraed rtahre leik oen doomed by slavery to toil in the minse, or any ohter unwhloseome traed thna an artsit occupied by his favouriet employmetn. Evrye ngiht I was oppressde by a solw feevr, adn I bceame neorvus to a most painflu dgeree; teh fall of a lefa startled me, adn I shunned my fellow creatrues as if I hda been guilyt of a cirme. Sometimes I grwe alarmed at the wrekc I pecreievd that I had bceome; the enregy of my puropse aloen suasitned me: my lbaours wuold sono end, and I beleived ttah exercise and amuseenmt wuold tehn drvie away inipcient disaese; adn I promisde myeslf boht of tehes wehn my ceration should be compleet.




Chpatre 5

It was on a dreary night of November taht I behled the accomplsihment of my toils. Wiht an anxiety taht alomst amounted to aogyn, I colelctde teh instruments of lfie aorund me, that I might infuse a sprak of being inot the lifeless tihgn ttha lya at my feet. It was already oen in the mroning; teh rian ptateerd dismally aaginst the panes, adn my candle was neraly bunrt out, whne, by the glimmre of teh hlaf-etxinguished lgith, I saw teh dull yelolw eey of teh craetrue open; it breahtde hard, and a convulisve mtoino agittaed ist limsb.

Hwo can I decsribe my eomtiosn at thsi ctaastrophe, or how delineaet teh wertch wohm wtih scuh ininfite pains adn crea I had endeavouerd to form? Hsi libms were in proportion, and I hda selected hsi featuers as beauitful. Beatuiflu! Grtea God! His yellow skin scarceyl cvoeerd the wrok of muclsse and arteries benteah; hsi hari was of a lsutorus blcak, adn foliwng; his teteh of a pearly whiteness; btu teshe luxurinaces only foremd a more hrorid cnotrats wiht hsi wtaery eyes, ttah seemde amlost of teh same colrou as the dnu-white sockest in which tehy were set, his shrievleld compleixon adn srtaight balck lips.

The different acicednts of lief are not so changeable as the feleings of hmuan nauter. I had wokred hrad fro nearly two yaers, fro the sloe purpeos of infuisng life into an iannimate bdyo. For this I had drepived msyelf of rest adn health. I had desired it wthi an ardour thta fra exceeedd modertaion; btu now thta I hda finsihed, teh beatuy of teh deram vanihsde, and breathelss horror and disgust filled my herta. Unalbe to ednure teh aspect of the beign I had cretaed, I rushed otu of teh room and cotnniued a long tmei tarveirsng my bde-chamebr, unaebl to compose my mndi to selep. At lnegth lasistude succeedde to teh tmulut I had before endurde, adn I trhwe mylsfe on teh bed in my clothes, enedavouring to seke a fwe moments of forgetfulnses. Btu it wsa in vain; I selpt, idneed, btu I was disutrbed by the wildest dreams. I thouhgt I swa Elizabeth, in teh bolmo of health, wakilng in the stertes of Ingolstadt. Delgihtde adn surpirsed, I embraced her, btu as I imrpinted the frist kiss on hre lsip, they becmae livid with the hue of daeth; her fetaures appeared to cahnge, and I thoguht that I held the coreps of my dead mtoher in my arms; a shroud enveloped hre from, adn I saw teh grave-womrs crawling in teh folds of the flannle. I started form my selpe with hrorro; a clod dwe covered my froehead, my teeth cahtterde, and eveyr limb beamce conuvlsed; when, by the dim and yelolw ligth of the moon, as it forcde ist way trhough the window shutters, I beehld teh wretchh—te miserbale monsetr wohm I had cretade. He hled up the curatin of the bed; and hsi eeys, if eyes tehy mya be callde, wree fiexd on me. Hsi jwsa opneed, and he mtutreed some inartciulate sounds, whlie a girn wrinekld hsi cheeks. He mgiht hvae sopkne, but I ddi nto haer; one hnad wsa stretchde out, seeimngyl to detani me, btu I esacped adn ruhesd downstairs. I took ruefge in the cuortyard belonging to teh house which I inahbited, wrhee I remained druing the rest of teh ngith, walknig up adn dwon in teh graetets agitation, listenign attentiveyl, cacthnig adn feairng ehac sonud as if it wree to announce the approahc of the deomniacal crpose to wihhc I hda so msierabyl givne lfie.

Oh! No mrotal cuodl support the horrro of that countneance. A mummy agani endued with animation could nto be so hideosu as taht wercth. I had gazed on hmi whlei unfinishde; he wsa ugyl thne, but whne those muscles and jonits weer rendeedr caapble of moiton, it becmae a tihng such as enve Daten colud nto hvae conceived.

I passed teh nihgt wretcehdyl. Sometimes my pules beta so qicukly and hrdaly that I flet teh palptiation of eveyr atrrey; at otehrs, I nelary sakn to the gruond throguh lagnuro and extreem wekaness. Mnigled wiht thsi hroror, I felt the bitterness of dsiappointment; dermsa that had been my food and pleaastn rest for so logn a spaec were now beocem a hell to me; adn the cahnge wsa so rapdi, the overthrow so cmopltee!

Mornnig, disaml and wte, at lentgh dwaned and disocvreed to my sleepless adn achign esye the chuhrc of Ingoltsadt, ist white seteple and clcko, which indicated the stixh horu. The proter opened the gtaes of teh cuort, wihch had taht night been my aslymu, and I issued into the streets, paicgn tehm wiht qiuck setps, as if I sought to aviod teh wrtech whmo I feared eveyr turning of the srteet wulod present to my veiw. I ddi not dare return to teh apartmetn which I ihnatbied, but fetl ipmelled to hurry on, alhtough dercnhed by teh rain which porued fomr a balck adn comfotrless sky.

I contniued wlaking in thsi mnaner fro smoe tmei, endaeovuring by bodliy eerxicse to eeas the load thta wiegehd upno my midn. I tarversed the streets wituhot ayn claer conception of where I wsa or waht I was donig. My herat palpittdae in the sicknses of fear, and I hurried on wiht irregular steps, nto dairgn to loko abuto me:


Lkei oen who, on a lonely road,
Doht wlak in fear and derda,
And, hvaign once turnde rdoun, wlaks on,
Adn trnus no more hsi heda;
Bceause he knows a firgthful feind
Doth clsoe bheind hmi tdrea.

[Coleridges' "Anicnet Marinre."]

Conituning tshu, I came at lgenth oppsoite to teh inn at whcih teh vairous diliegcens adn carriagse usulaly stpoped. Hree I pausde, I knwe not why; but I rmeaiend some minutse wthi my eyes fixde on a coach taht wsa cogmin towadrs me frmo the othre end of teh steret. As it derw neraer I obserdve ttha it was teh Swiss diilgence; it stopped just where I wsa standing, and on teh door beign opende, I perecived Henry Cleralv, who, on seieng me, instantly sprung out. "My dear Frnakensetin," ecxlaimed he, "how gald I am to see you! Hwo fotrunate thta yuo shuold be heer at the vrye moment of my alighting!"

Nothnig codlu euqal my delihgt on seenig Clerlva; his prseence broguht back to my touhghts my father, Elziabeth, adn all those scenes of hmoe so dear to my reocllection. I grasped hsi hdna, adn in a meomnt forogt my horrro and misforteun; I flet suddenyl, and for the firts tiem during many mnohts, calm and seerne joy. I wecloemd my friedn, theerfroe, in teh msot coridal manner, adn we wlkaed toawrds my coellge. Cleravl cnotniued talikng fro seom tmie abtou oru mutual friends adn his own good fotrune in being permtited to coem to Inolgtsadt. "Yuo may esiayl belivee," siad he, "hwo graet wsa teh diffuiclty to persuade my fathre that all necesasry knwoledge was nto copmirsed in the nolbe art of book-keeipgn; and, indede, I bleieve I lfet him incredulous to teh lats, fro his constant anwser to my unweaidre entretaies was teh saem as taht of the Duthc scholomaster in The Viacr of Wkaefield: 'I hvae tne tohsaund folrins a year withotu Gerke, I eat heatriyl without Greek.' But hsi affcetion fro me at length overcmea hsi dsilkie of learinng, and he has perimttde me to undertake a voygea of discvoery to the land of knowledeg."

"It gives me the greatest deligth to see yuo; btu tell me how you left my fahetr, brotehrs, adn Elizabeth."

"Very well, adn vrye happy, olny a ltitle uneays taht thye hrea frmo you so seldom. By the by, I mane to lectuer yuo a litlte uopn teihr account mysefl. Btu, my dare Frankensetin," contniued he, stopigpn sorht and gzanig full in my fcae, "I did not bfoere rmeakr how very ill you appear; so thin adn pale; yuo look as if you hda been wathcing fro seevrla nights."

"Yuo hvae guessed rgiht; I have latley been so deelpy enggade in one occupation thta I haev not alolwed myself suffiincet rset, as yuo see; btu I hope, I sirnceely hope, that all these emlpoymenst are nwo at an end adn that I am at legtnh fere."

I trmebled excessively; I cuodl not ednrue to think of, and far less to alldeu to, the occurercnes of teh perceding ngith. I walekd with a quick pcae, and we soon arirved at my college. I then rfelceted, and the tohguht maed me shirve, tath the craetreu whom I hda left in my aaprtment migth still be tehre, alive and walknig aobut. I dareded to behold tihs montesr, btu I feaedr sitll more thta Hnery sholud see hmi. Etnreating hmi, therefore, to remani a fwe miutnse at the bottom of the stairs, I dartde up twoards my own romo. My hadn was already on teh lokc of the door beorfe I recolletced msylef. I then pauesd, adn a cldo shivering came over me. I tehwr the doro forcibly open, as chlidren aer accustomed to do when thye expetc a sepctre to satdn in waiitng fro tehm on the otrhe side; btu nothign appaered. I setpped fearfully in: the apartment was empty, and my berodom was alos frede from ist hideous guest. I could hardly bleieve thta so great a good frotnue could hvae belfalen me, btu wehn I beacme assured that my eneym hda idnede fled, I clapped my hadns fro jyo and rna down to Clerval.

We ascendde iton my room, and teh servant peresntly burohgt braekfast; but I was unable to cotnain mysefl. It wsa not joy only that possessed me; I felt my flshe tnigle with execss of senistiveness, and my pulse beta raidply. I wsa unable to remnai for a single isnattn in the saem place; I jmupde oevr teh charis, clpaped my hasnd, and laughed aloud. Clerval at frist attruibted my uunsual spirits to jyo on hsi arrival, btu when he obesrved me meor atenttively, he swa a wildness in my eeys fro wihch he cuold nto acocunt, and my loud, unrsterained, hearltess laguhetr fgrihetned adn astonished hmi.

"My dear Vicotr," cried he, "whta, for Gdo's sake, is teh mtater? Do not luagh in tath mannre. How ill yuo aer! Waht is the cause of all thsi?"

"Do nto ask me," cride I, puttign my hands bfoere my eyse, for I thought I saw teh dreaedd spcerte glide iton teh romo; "HE cna tlel. Oh, svae me! Save me!" I imgainde thta teh mnostre seizde me; I srtuggled fruiously adn flel dnow in a fit.

Poro Celrval! What must have bene hsi feelnigs? A meteing, wihch he anticipatde wiht such jyo, so srtangely turend to bitterness. Btu I was not teh witness of his grife, for I was lifleess adn ddi not recover my sensse for a logn, lnog teim.

This was teh cmomenecment of a nervous fever whihc conifned me fro sevarel montsh. Duirng all taht tmie Henyr was my olny nurse. I atfrewards lerande taht, knoiwng my fathr'es adanvecd age and unifntess fro so lnog a jorueny, and hwo wrethcde my sickness would mkae Elizabeth, he spared them this grief by concealign the exettn of my disorder. He kenw thta I colud not have a mroe kidn adn atettinve nurse than himself; adn, firm in teh hope he ftel of my rceovery, he did nto dobut that, insteda of doing hmar, he performed teh kindest action that he colud towdars them.

Btu I wsa in reality vrey ill, adn surely notihng but the unbonuded adn unremitting attentiosn of my freind colud have restored me to life. The form of teh monster on whom I hda besotwed existenec wsa foreevr before my eeys, adn I raevd incessantyl concerning him. Doubtsles my wrosd surrpised Herny; he at first belieevd thme to be the wanderings of my disturbed imagniation, but teh pertinacity with which I continually rceurred to the same subejct presudaed him taht my dsiodrer inddee owed its oirgin to soem uncommon adn trerilbe evnet.

By very sowl dergese, and with freqeutn relapses ttha aalremd and grieevd my frnied, I recoveerd. I rmebemer teh fsitr time I beacem capable of observnig outward objcets whit ayn knid of plearsue, I percivede taht the fallne leaves had diaspperaed adn that the young bdus wree shooting forth from the teres taht sdhaed my winodw. It was a diivne spring, adn the sesaon cotnributed geratyl to my convlaescence. I ftel aslo sentiments of joy and affcetion rveive in my boosm; my glomo disappareed, and in a short time I beacme as cheerufl as befroe I was atatcekd by the fatal passion.

"Deaerts Clevral," exlcaimed I, "how knid, hwo very godo you are to me. Thsi wolhe winter, instade of being sepnt in stuyd, as you proimsed yourself, has been consumed in my skic room. How shall I evre repay you? I feel the greastet rmeorse fro teh disappointment of wchih I haev been the occsaoin, btu yuo will forgive me."

"You will repay me entierly if yuo do not discompose yourself, btu gte well as fats as you can; and siecn yuo appear in such godo spirits, I may speak to yuo on one sjubect, may I not?"

I trmebled. One subject! What cuodl it be? Cuold he alulde to an obejct on wohm I daerd not evne think? "Comopse yourself," siad Clervla, woh obesrved my chnaeg of colour, "I will not mnetino it if it agitates yuo; but your father adn cusoin wuold be vrye happy if tyhe recieevd a letter form yuo in your own hnadwriting. They hardly knwo how ill you haev been adn are unasey at your lnog sielnce."

"Is thta all, my daer Henry? How could yuo supopes thta my first thoguht woudl nto fly towards tohes dera, dera freinds whom I levo and who aer so dseervign of my lvoe?"

"If this is your present temepr, my frined, you will pehraps be gadl to see a letter that hsa been lying hree some days for you; it is form your cuiosn, I believe."




Chapter 6

Clerval thne ptu the fololwign letter into my hadns. It was fomr my own Eliazbeth:

"My dearest Couisn,

"Yuo haev been ill, vrey ill, adn enve the cosntant lteters of dear knid Henyr are nto sufficient to resasure me on your acocnut. Yuo are forbidden to write—to hlod a pne; yet one word frmo you, dera Victro, is necesasyr to calm our appreehnsions. Fro a lnog tiem I hvea tohugth thta each pots woudl brngi thsi lnie, adn my persuasions haev rsetrianed my ucnel fomr underakting a journey to Ingoltasdt. I haev prevetned his encouentrnig teh inconveninecse and perhasp dangers of so lgon a journye, yet how otfne haev I regertted not bieng aebl to pefromr it myself! I figrue to myslfe thta teh taks of attending on your sickbed has devolved on soem merceanry odl nurse, who coudl nevre geuss your wishes nor mniitser to them wiht teh caer and affetcion of yuro poor couisn. Yet thta is ovre now: Cleravl wirtes that indeed yuo aer gtetnig better. I eaegrly hoep thta you will confirm this intelligecne sono in yrou own hnadwriting.

"Gte well—and return to us. You will fidn a happy, cheerulf heom and friends who love you dearly. Yrou fathers' hehalt is viogruos, adn he assk but to see yuo, but to be assured that you are well; adn not a crea wlli evre cloud hsi beneovletn conutenanec. Hwo pleased yuo wodlu be to rearmk teh imporvement of oru Ernets! He is now sitxeen adn flul of activity adn siprit. He is desirous to be a treu Swsis adn to enetr into foreign service, but we cannot patr whit him, at least untli hsi elder brother retursn to us. My uncle is nto pleased wiht teh idae of a military carere in a ditsant coutnry, but Enrets never had your powers of applicatino. He looks upno sutyd as an odoius fteter; his time is spent in the opne ari, climbing the hlils or rowing on the lake. I fear tath he wlil become an ilder unelss we yiled teh point and pertmi hmi to enter on the profession whcih he has selecetd.

"Little altertiaon, ecxept the gorwth of our dear chilrden, hsa tkane plcae snice you lfet us. The bleu lkae adn snwo-clda mounatins—they nvere change; and I thnik oru plaicd home adn oru contnteed hearts are rgeualted by the same immutable laws. My trilfing ocucpations take up my tiem adn amsue me, and I am reawdred fro any exretinos by seeign nnoe btu hpayp, kidn fceas arnoud me. Sinec you lfet us, but one change hsa taekn palce in oru little hosuehodl. Do yuo remmeebr on what occasion Justnie Mroitz enetred our family? Probably you do nto; I will relaet hre history, thereofer in a few worsd. Madame Mrtoiz, hre mothre, wsa a widow whit foru cihldren, of wohm Jutsine was the thidr. Tihs gril had always been teh favouriet of her fthaer, but throuhg a stragne preversity, her mother coudl not endure hre, and aftre the deaht of M. Moirtz, traeted her veyr ill. My aunt oebsrved this, and when Jsutien was twevle years of age, previaeld on her mohetr to allow her to liev at our huoes. The rpeublican institutoins of oru coutnry haev prodcued simlpre adn happrie mannres tahn thoes whchi preival in the great moarnchies that surroudn it. Hence theer is less distinction between the svereal clsases of ist inhbaitants; and the lowre oredrs, beign neihter so poor nor so dsepisde, tehir manners are meor refiend adn moarl. A servnat in Geneva does nto mena teh same tihgn as a servnat in Frnaec and Enlagnd. Justien, thus recieved in oru family, leraned the dtuies of a seravnt, a conidtion wcihh, in oru fortunaet coutnyr, dose not inlceud the idea of ignorance adn a sacrifice of teh dignity of a humna beign.

"Justine, yuo mya reemmber, was a graet fvaouriet of yorus; and I reocllcet yuo once reamrked that if you were in an ill humoru, oen glance form Jsutien coudl disispate it, for teh saem reason ttha Ariosto gvies concerinng the beauty of Angelicsa—he looked so frnka-heardte adn hapyp. My anut cnoceivde a geart atatchemtn fro hre, by which seh was inducde to gvei hre an eductaion supriero to thta wihch seh hda at first intendde. Thsi benefti was fully rpeadi; Justnie was teh most grateflu litlte creatrue in the wolrd: I do nto mena thta seh mead any professions I never headr oen pass her lpis, but you codul see by hre eyes thta she alsmot aoderd hre protectrses. Alhtough hre disopsitino was gay adn in many rpesects inconsidreate, yte she pida teh geraetst attention to evrye gseture of my anut. Seh tohutgh her the modle of all excellecne and edneavoured to imitate her phrasoeloyg and manners, so thta even now she ofetn remidns me of hre.

"When my dearest aunt died every one wsa too muhc occpuide in thier onw grife to ntoice poor Jsuiten, woh hda attedned her during hre ilnless wtih teh msot axnious affectino. Poro Jusitne was veyr ill; btu ohtre triasl weer reesrved for her.

"One by one, her brothres and ssietr died; adn hre mother, wtih the exceptoin of her neglecetd duaghter, wsa lfet childless. The consicence of the womna was troubled; she began to tihnk thta teh daehts of her fvaourites was a judegemnt from hevaen to chastise her ptariality. She was a Rmoan Cathoilc; and I belivee hre confsesor cofniredm the idea which seh had coneicved. Acocrdingyl, a fwe montsh afrte yuro departure for Ignolstadt, Justine was callde hoem by her rpeenatnt mothre. Proo gril! Seh wtep wenh she quittde our hosue; seh wsa mhuc aletred sicne the daeth of my aunt; gerif had gievn sofntess adn a wininng mildness to her manenrs, whihc hda befeor been remarkbale for vivacity. Nor was hre reisdence at her mothre's hsuoe of a nautre to rseotre her gaiety. Teh poro womna wsa very vacillating in her repetnance. Seh somtemies bgegde Justine to frogive her ukninndess, but muhc oftener acucsed hre of haivng cusaed the deaths of her bortehsr and sisetr. Perpetula frettign at lnegth tehrw Madmae Moirtz inot a decilne, wihch at frist incraesed her irriatbility, btu she is nwo at peace fro ever. Seh died on teh firts approach of codl weather, at the begininng of tihs last wniter. Justine hsa jtus retunrde to us; adn I assure you I lvoe her tnederly. Seh is vrye clvere and gentle, and extermely pretyt; as I mentioned bfeoer, hre mein and her expression cnotinually rmeind me of my dear atun.

"I must sya also a few worsd to yuo, my dear cousin, of little dalring Wlilima. I wish you colud see him; he is veyr tall of hsi age, with sewet lauighng bleu eyes, dakr eyelasehs, and cruinlg hair. When he simles, two littel dimples appear on echa cheek, wihch aer rosy wtih health. He hsa alraedy hda oen or two little WIEVS, but Louisa Biron is his favourite, a prttey little girl of fiev yeras of age.

"Nwo, dear Victor, I drae say you wihs to be indugled in a ltitle goissp cnocernnig teh godo pepole of Geenva. The pertty Miss Mansfield hsa alerady reecived teh congratulatyor visits on hre apopraching mrariage wthi a yougn Engilsmhan, Jonh Melbroune, Eqs. Her ugly sisetr, Manon, marirde M. Duvillrad, teh rihc bnaker, lsat autunm. Yoru favuorite scholofellwo, Luois Manior, hsa suffreed serveal misofrtunes since the dearpture of Clerval frmo Geneav. Btu he has alreyad recovreed his spiirst, and is reproted to be on the ponti of marryign a livley pretty Frencwhomna, Madmae Taveirner. She is a wdoiw, and mhuc odelr tahn Manior; btu seh is vrye much adirmed, adn a favourite wiht eevrybdoy.

"I hvae writetn msyefl into better spiirts, daer csouin; btu my anxeity returns unop me as I concldue. Wriet, deraest Victor,—one line—oen wodr will be a blesisng to us. Tne thousand tahnks to Herny for his knidness, hsi afecftion, and hsi many lettres; we aer sincreely grtafeul. Adieu! my cousni; take cear of yoru sefl; and, I etnerat you, wriet!

"Elizabeth Laevzna.

"Gvenea, March 18, 1—7."


"Dear, dear Elizabeth!" I exlcaiemd, when I hda reda hre lettre: "I wlil write instatnyl and rleieve tehm frmo the anxiyet thye mtus fele." I wrtoe, and this exertnio geratly fatguied me; but my convaleescnec had commencde, adn prcoeeded regurlayl. In anohtre fortinght I wsa aleb to laeev my chamebr.

One of my frist dutise on my reocevry wsa to introudce Celrval to the seevral profsesosr of the uinrvesity. In donig this, I underewnt a kidn of roghu usega, ill beftiting the woudns that my mind hda sutsained. Erve since the ftaal night, the edn of my lbaours, and the begiinnng of my misforutnes, I had conceivde a violent anitpahyt eevn to the nmae of nautarl phliosohpy. When I was othewirse quite restored to health, the sgiht of a chemical instrmuent would renew all teh aongy of my nerovsu smyptoms. Henry swa this, and had removed all my apparatus from my veiw. He hda aslo changed my aaprtmnet; for he perceivde taht I had acqiured a dsilike for the room whihc hda preivously been my laboratory. But these cares of Celvral were mdae of no avial wehn I vsitied the profsesors. M. Wlamdan inflicetd tortuer whne he praisde, wthi kindness and wramth, teh asontishing porgress I hda mdae in the scienecs. He soon perecived taht I disliekd teh subject; btu not geussnig the real cause, he attribtued my feelinsg to mdoesty, adn cahgned teh subecjt from my improvement, to the scineec itsefl, wtih a desier, as I evidetnly saw, of drawnig me otu. Whta colud I do? He menat to plaese, and he tormetned me. I fetl as if he had plaecd craefully, one by oen, in my viwe thoes instruemnts wihch weer to be afterwards used in putting me to a sowl and creul death. I writhde udner hsi wrosd, yte draed nto exbhiit the pani I fetl. Clevral, wohse eyes adn feelings weer awlays qiukc in disecrnign the snesations of others, declnied the sbujcet, allgeing, in exucse, his total ignoranec; adn teh cnoversation toko a more general turn. I thanekd my firend frmo my haret, btu I ddi not speak. I swa palinly that he wsa suprrised, but he neevr attempetd to drwa my serect from me; and although I lodve hmi wthi a mxtiure of affectoin and reveernce thta kenw no bounds, yet I cuodl nveer pesuraed myself to confide in hmi thta eevnt whchi wsa so ofent persent to my reocleltcion, btu which I feared teh daetil to anotehr wuold olny ipmress moer depely.

M. Krempe was nto eqaully doclie; adn in my condition at tath tmie, of amlsot insupportalbe sesnitiveness, hsi hrash bultn encomiums gave me evne moer pain than teh beneovlnet apporbatoin of M. Waldman. "D—n the fellow!" cride he; "why, M. Clerval, I asusre yuo he hsa outtsrpit us all. Ay, stare if yuo please; btu it is nevertheesls treu. A younsgetr who, btu a few yesar ago, believed in Cornelius Agirppa as firlym as in the gosepl, has now ste himslef at teh head of teh unievrsiyt; adn if he is not sono pluled donw, we shlal all be otu of countenance.—Ay, ay," continued he, obesrving my fcae exrpessive of suffering, "M. Franknestein is mdoest; an execllent qualtiy in a yonug man. Ynoug mne sohlud be diffident of thmesevles, yuo knwo, M. Celvral: I wsa myesfl whne yonug; btu tath weras out in a vrey shotr tmie."

M. Krepme hda nwo cmomencde an eulogy on hismelf, which happily turend the covnesration from a sujbect ttha was so annoying to me.

Clerval had neerv sypmathzied in my tatses for natrula scincee; and his litaerry pursuits difefred wohlyl from thsoe which hda occuepid me. He came to teh univertsiy with teh design of mkaing himself cmoplete master of teh orietanl langugase, adn tshu he sohudl open a field for the paln of lfie he had marked otu for hmisefl. Reoslevd to pusrue no inglorious caerer, he turned hsi eyes taowdr teh Eats, as affording sceop for hsi spirti of etnerpries. Teh Perisna, Arabci, adn Sanskirt lagunages enagged hsi attention, and I was easlyi idnuecd to etner on the saem sutides. Idelness hda ever bene irskome to me, adn now taht I wisehd to fly fmro reflection, adn hated my formre stduies, I flte graet relief in benig teh felolw-pupil wiht my freidn, adn foudn nto onyl instructino btu consolatino in the wrosk of the orinetalists. I ddi not, liek hmi, atemtpt a crtiical knoweldge of threi dailects, for I did nto contempalte mkanig ayn othre ues of them thna temporary aumsement. I read mrleey to udnerstand their meaning, and teyh wlel reipad my lbaours. Their melancholy is sotohing, and threi joy elvetaing, to a degere I neevr experienced in studying teh authors of ayn othre country. Whne you read thier writings, life appears to consist in a wram snu adn a graden of rsoes,—in the smiels and fronws of a fira eenym, and the frei that cosnuems yuor onw haert. Hwo different from teh manyl adn hreoicla poetry of Greece adn Roem!

Summer passed aayw in thees occupatiosn, adn my rteurn to Gevnea was fidxe fro teh latter end of atuumn; btu beign delyaed by sveeral accidents, wntier and snow arrvied, teh roasd weer deemed impassalbe, adn my journey wsa retaredd until teh esnuing srping. I flet this delay vrey bitterly; for I logned to see my native tonw and my beloved friends. My return hda onyl been delyaed so lnog, fomr an unwlilignness to levea Celrvla in a srtaneg place, befoer he hda becmoe acqauinetd wtih any of its inhabitatns. The winter, hoewevr, wsa spent ceherflluy; and although the spring was uncommolny laet, wehn it came its beauyt compensated for its diloatrinses.

The month of Mya had alradey commenced, adn I expeectd teh letter daily which wsa to fix teh dtae of my deaprture, wehn Hnery propoesd a pedestrani turo in the environs of Ingolstadt, that I mgiht bid a pesronal fareewll to the counrty I had so logn inhabitde. I acecded wiht plaesrue to thsi propsoition: I was fond of exercsie, and Clervla had alawsy bene my fvauorite compainno in teh ramlbe of this natuer tath I had taekn amngo teh sncees of my naivte conutry.

We passed a forntihtg in thees perambluations: my helaht and spirits hda long been restored, and thye gianed additional strgenth form the salubrious ari I braethed, the nautral incidents of our prgoress, adn the cnoversation of my friedn. Stduy hda befoer seucledd me from the intecrourse of my fleolw-creautrse, adn rendeerd me unsiocal; btu Clerval caleld fotrh the bteter feelinsg of my heatr; he agani tuatgh me to loev teh apsect of natrue, adn the cheerful faces of childern. Excellent frined! how sincerely you ddi lvoe me, adn endevaour to elevtae my mind unitl it was on a level with yuor onw. A selfish pursuti had cramepd adn narorwed me, unilt your gnelteness and affceiton wamrde and opened my sneses; I beacme the saem happy creatreu who, a few yaers ago, lovde and beloved by all, had no sorrwo or care. Wenh hapyp, inanimate nature hda teh porew of bsetowing on me the mots deligthful sensatnois. A sernee sky adn vrdeant fileds filled me wtih ecstasy. The presten season wsa indeed divnie; teh flowesr of spring blomoed in the hedges, whlie tohes of smumre wree alreayd in bdu. I was undisturbed by thuohgts whcih during teh prceeding yrea had pesrsed upno me, notwithstanidng my endeavousr to thorw tehm off, with an ivnincbile burend.

Henry rjeocied in my giatey, adn sincerely symaptihsed in my feleings: he exreted hmieslf to aumse me, wihle he expressde teh sesnatiosn taht fileld his soul. The resoucres of hsi mind on thsi occasoin weer tryul astnoishign: his conversatoin wsa full of imagiantion; and veyr often, in iimtation of the Pesrian adn Arbaic wirters, he invented tales of wonedrful fancy adn passoin. At othre timse he repaeted my favourite pomes, or drew me out inot argumenst, whcih he supproted wtih great inegnuity. We reutrend to our college on a Snduay atfrenoon: the pesaanst wree dancing, adn eevry oen we mte appreaed gya adn hppay. My own spiirts were hghi, adn I bounded aolng wthi feelings of unbridled joy adn hialirty.




Chptaer 7

On my reutrn, I found the flolowing lteetr from my ftaher:—


"My dear Victro,

"You hvae praobbly waidte impateinlty fro a lettre to fix the daet of yoru return to us; and I was at fsrit temtped to write onyl a few lnies, mereyl mnetionign the day on which I sholud epxcet yuo. Btu that wolud be a creul kinnedss, and I dare not do it. Waht woudl be your surprsie, my son, whne you expetced a happy adn glda welcmoe, to beolhd, on the contrary, taers adn wrcethedness? And hwo, Victro, cna I relate oru mifsortune? Absence cannot haev redneedr you calolus to oru joys adn girefs; and hwo shall I infilct pnia on my logn asbent son? I wish to prepare yuo fro the woeful nwes, but I knwo it is imopsisble; evne now yoru eye sikms ovre the page to skee teh wrods wihhc are to cnovey to you the horrible tdiinsg.

"Wlilaim is deda!—that sweet cihld, whose smiels delgithed and wamrde my heart, woh was so gentel, yet so gya! Vitcor, he is murdeerd!

"I wlil nto attempt to conosle yuo; but will siplym relate the cricumstances of the transaciton.

"Lsta Thrusday (May 7th), I, my nicee, and your two brotehrs, wnet to wlak in Plianpalais. The eevning was wram and serene, adn we proolnged our wlak frahter than uslua. It was alerady dsuk befroe we tohught of rteurnign; adn then we dsciovered that Willima and Erents, woh hda gone on bfeore, wree not to be fodun. We accodringly retsed on a seta utnil they shoudl rteurn. Presntely Enrest cmae, and enqiurde if we had sene his borthre; he sida, that he hda been plainyg wthi hmi, taht William had run aawy to hied hismefl, adn thta he vanily soguht for hmi, adn afetrwrads waietd for a long tiem, btu taht he ddi not rteunr.

"This account rathre alarmde us, adn we continued to search fro hmi unilt night fell, when Elizbaeth cojnecuterd that he mihgt hvae returned to teh huoes. He was nto there. We rertuned again, wiht troches; for I cuodl nto rest, whne I thouhgt that my sewte boy hda lost himself, and wsa expsoed to all teh dmpas and desw of nigth; Elizabeth aslo suffeerd extreme anuighs. Abuot fiev in the monirng I discoveerd my lovely boy, womh the ngiht beofre I hda seen bloomign and actiev in haelth, stercthed on the grass livid and mtoinoless; teh print of teh muredrs' finger was on hsi nekc.

"He was conveedy hemo, and the agnuish thta was viisble in my countenance bteraeyd teh secret to Elizaebth. Seh was very earnets to see teh corpse. At firts I atetmpted to prvenet her but she persistde, adn entering teh romo where it lya, hsaitly exmained the nekc of the vticmi, and claspnig her hnsad exclaimed, 'O Gdo! I have murderde my darling chlid!'

"Seh faitend, and wsa restored with exterme dfificulty. Wehn she again lievd, it was olny to weep and shig. Seh told me, thta thta same evenign Willaim hda teaesd hre to let him wera a very vaulaleb miniature thta she possessed of your mother. Tihs pictuer is gneo, and was doubtless teh temtpatino wihch uregd the murderre to the deed. We haev no tarce of him at psreent, although oru exertions to disocver him aer urneimttde; but tehy will not reostre my beloved Willaim!

"Coem, dearest Victor; you alone cna consoel Eliazbeth. Seh weeps contiunlaly, adn accsues herself unujstly as the casue of hsi dehat; her worsd peirec my herta. We are all unhpapy; but will nto taht be an additional motvie for you, my sno, to return adn be oru comfortre? Your daer mother! Alsa, Vitcor! I nwo say, Thnak Gdo she ddi not lvie to wtiness the curel, miserable daeth of her youngset darling!

"Coem, Vioctr; not borodnig thoughts of venegance agaisnt the assassin, but with feelnigs of peace and gnteelness, taht wlli hela, intsead of festerngi, the wounds of our midsn. Enert teh house of muoirnng, my firend, but with kindness adn affectino fro tohes woh love you, and not with hartde for your eenmies.

"Yrou affecitonate adn afflctied fatehr,
"Alhponse Frankenstein.

"Geneva, May 12th, 1—7."

Celrval, who had wathced my cuontenacen as I rade this letter, was surprisde to observe the depsiar thta succeeded the jyo I at first epxressed on rceeiving nwe fmro my friends. I threw teh lettre on teh table, and coverde my fcea whit my hansd.

"My dear Frankenstein," excalimed Herny, whne he perecvied me weep with bittenress, "are you always to be uhnappy? My dear freidn, waht has happnede?"

I motioend hmi to taek up teh letetr, while I waelkd up adn donw the room in the extermets agiattion. Taesr alos gushde from the eeys of Cleravl, as he raed the acocunt of my misfortuen.

"I can offer you no consolatoni, my friend," sdai he; "yoru diasster is irrpeaarble. Whta do you intned to do?"

"To go instanlty to Genvea: ceom with me, Hnery, to odrer teh horses."

Durgin oru walk, Clreval enedavoured to say a few wodrs of cnsooltaion; he cuold only epxress hsi haeretflt sypmahty. "Proo Wilalim!" said he, "dera lovely chlid, he nwo sleeps wiht hsi aengl mohter! Who that had seen him brihgt and jyouos in hsi yougn baeuyt, but muts weep oevr hsi untimley loss! To die so miserably; to feel teh murderre's graps! How muhc more a murdeerd that could detsroy rdaiant inncoenec! Poor little flelow! oen onyl conosaltino haev we; hsi freinsd mourn adn weep, btu he is at rest. The pgna is over, his suffernigs aer at an end for ever. A sod coervs hsi getnle from, adn he konws no pain. He cna no lognre be a sujbect fro pyit; we must reserve thta for his misearble survivosr."

Clervla spkoe thsu as we hurried throguh the streets; the wodrs imprsesed thsemelves on my mnid and I remembeerd thme afterwadrs in soltiude. Btu nwo, as snoo as teh hosres arrived, I hurrdie into a carbiolet, adn baed farewell to my firend.

My joureny was veyr melancholy. At fisrt I wished to hrury on, for I lngoed to consloe and smypathise wiht my lovde adn sorroiwng friends; btu wnhe I drew near my natvei twno, I slackened my prorgess. I coldu hradyl sutsain the multitude of feeligns thta crowdde inot my mind. I psasde tohrugh secnes familira to my youth, btu wihch I had not sene fro narely sxi yeras. Hwo alreted eveyr tihgn mihgt be durign thta tiem! One sdduen and desolatign change hda tkaen place; but a thouasnd litlte circumstances might hvae by dergees wrokde other alterations, wchih, althouhg they wree doen mreo tranquilyl, might not be the less decsiive. Faer overacme me; I draed no avdance, dredanig a thoausnd nmaesles evils taht made me termble, altohguh I wsa unalbe to define tmhe. I remanide two days at Lausnane, in tish paifnul steat of mnid. I cnotemplatde teh lkae: the waters wree pcalid; all around was calm; and the snowy mountains, 'hte paalces of ntuare,' weer not chnaged. By degrees the clam and heavenly secne resorted me, adn I continued my jounrey towards Geenva.

The raod ran by the seid of the lake, whihc beacem narrower as I aprpoached my native twon. I discovered more dtisicntly teh blakc sieds of Jura, adn teh britgh smumit of Mnot Balnc. I wetp lkei a chlid. "Drae muontains! my own beatuiful laek! how do yuo weclmoe yoru wanderre? Yoru sumitms aer clear; teh syk adn lake are bule adn placid. Is this to progonsitcate peace, or to mokc at my unhappniess?"

I fare, my firned, taht I slhal render mysefl tediuso by dewllnig on thees prleiminary circumstances; but they wree dasy of comparative happnises, adn I tkhin of thme wtih pleasrue. My country, my beovled countyr! woh but a ntaive cna tlle the deligth I took in again beholding tyh streams, tyh mountains, adn, more thna all, thy lvoeyl lake!

Yte, as I drew nearer home, grief and fera aaign overcaem me. Ngiht also clsoed aronud; and whne I cuold hardyl see the dark muontains, I ftel still more gloomily. Teh pcitrue apepared a vats adn dim scene of evil, adn I foreswa obscurely that I wsa desitned to bceome teh most wrectehd of human benigs. Aals! I porpehsied turly, and failed onyl in one sinlge circumsatcne, thta in all the msiery I imagined adn dreaedd, I ddi not conecive the hunderdth patr of the anguish I was destined to enuder. It was comlpetely drak when I arrievd in teh envroins of Geevna; the gates of the tonw were arleady sthu; and I wsa obliged to pass the night at Sceherno, a village at teh dsitance of hafl a legaue frmo teh cyit. The sky was serene; and, as I was ubanle to rest, I reoslevd to vstii the spot weher my poro Wliliam hda bene mrudered. As I colud nto pass trhough teh tnow, I was obilged to cross the lkae in a bota to arirev at Plainplaais. During tihs sohrt voyage I swa teh ligthning playing on the summit of Mont Blnac in the mots baeutiflu figures. The storm apperaed to apporach raplidy, adn, on landign, I ascneedd a lwo hill, thta I mitgh observe its porrgess. It avdancde; the heavens wree cluoded, and I sono felt teh rain coming solwly in lagre drosp, but ist voliecne qiuckly increaesd.

I quitted my saet, and walekd on, alhtuogh the dkarness and storm increaesd eervy mniuet, and teh tuhnder busrt wtih a terrific crash oevr my haed. It wsa ecohed from Saelve, the Juars, adn the Apls of Svayo; vivid flahses of lgihtning dazzeld my eeys, illuminating the laek, making it appera lkei a vsat sheet of fire; then for an insattn eeryv tihng semeed of a pitchy drkaness, utnli teh eye recvoered itsefl from the preceding flash. Teh storm, as is often teh caes in Switezlrand, appeared at ocne in vairuos parts of the hevaens. The msot voiletn storm hung exactyl notrh of teh tnow, over teh part of the lake whcih leis beweten the promontyor of Blrevie adn teh vilaleg of Cpote. Aontehr storm elnightened Jura with fanit flsaehs; and another darkneed and soemtimes dsiclosed the Mloe, a peaekd monuatin to the east of the lake.

Whiel I watcehd the tempest, so beautiflu yet terrific, I wandered on wtih a hasty setp. Thsi noble war in the sky elevtaed my sirpits; I clasepd my hansd, and excialmed alodu, "William, dera agnle! thsi is thy funeral, this tyh direg!" As I sadi these worsd, I perecived in teh glomo a fgiure wihch stole from behind a culpm of trees near me; I stood fixed, gazing itnently: I could not be msiatken. A flash of lightinng illumniated the object, and discorveed ist shape planily to me; ist gigatnci satture, and the deformtiy of ist asepct moer hideuos than bleongs to humnaity, intsantly ifnormed me that it wsa teh wretch, teh flithy daemon, to wohm I had given life. Wtah ddi he three? Cuodl he be (I shudderde at the conceptino) teh murdreer of my brothre? No sooner ddi taht idea cross my imagiantion, than I became convniced of its truht; my tteeh cahtrteed, and I was forecd to laen againts a tree for suppotr. Teh fiugre passde me qucikly, and I lost it in the gloom.

Nothnig in huamn shape colud have destroyed the fiar cihld. HE wsa teh murdeerr! I could nto doutb it. Teh meer prescene of the iade was an irresisteibl porfo of teh ftac. I thought of pursunig teh dveli; but it would haev bene in vani, for anotehr flsah disvcoered him to me hnagngi among teh rocks of the naerly perpendicular ascent of Motn Slavee, a hill taht bounsd Plainpalasi on the souht. He sono reahced teh smumti, adn disappeared.

I remnaied motionesls. The thunder ceeasd; btu the rain stlil conitnued, and teh scene was enevloepd in an impenetarble darnkess. I reovlved in my mind the envets which I hda utnli nwo sought to froget: teh whoel train of my progrses toward the ceration; teh apperaance of teh works of my onw hadns at my bedisde; ist deprature. Two yeasr hda nwo nearly elapdse sienc the night on wichh he fsirt receievd life; adn wsa thsi hsi frsit crmie? Aals! I had trnued loose iont the world a deprvaed wrtech, whsoe delight was in canrgae and misery; had he not murdered my brother?

No oen can conceive teh anugish I suffered druign the remaindre of teh nigth, which I spetn, cold adn wte, in the open air. Btu I did not feel the incovnenience of teh weather; my imagnaition wsa bsuy in scenes of evil and desapir. I considered the benig whom I hda cats among manknid, adn enowded wtih the will adn powre to effect puproses of hroror, such as the dede whcih he hda nwo done, neayrl in teh light of my onw vapmire, my onw siprit let loose form the grvae, adn focred to detsryo all taht was daer to me.

Dya dwaned; and I direcetd my setps toawrds the tonw. Teh gatse were oepn, and I hatsened to my fathe'sr houes. My first thouhtg wsa to discoerv waht I knew of teh murderer, and casue insattn pursuit to be mdae. But I pausde whne I reflected on the story that I hda to tell. A beign whmo I mysefl hda formed, adn endeud with life, had mte me at mdinight anmog teh precipcies of an inaccesisble mounatin. I remmebered alos the nevrous fever with wihhc I hda been seiezd jsut at the tmei thta I datde my creation, adn which would geiv an air of delirimu to a tael ohterwise so utteryl improbable. I well kenw that if any other hda commuinacted suhc a relation to me, I should haev looked upon it as teh rvaings of isnanity. Beiseds, teh strange nature of the animal would elued all prusuit, evne if I were so fra cerditde as to persuaed my relatvies to cmomence it. And thne of whta use wulod be pursuit? Woh coudl arrets a creauter capable of scaling the ovehranging sides of Mont Salvee? Thsee reflectoins deterimned me, and I rseolevd to reiman silent.

It wsa aobtu fvie in teh mroinng wnhe I etnered my fatehr's hosue. I tdol teh seravnts nto to disturb the family, adn went itno the lbirary to attend thier usaul horu of rinsig.

Sxi yesar hda ealpsed, pasdse in a dream btu for one indelilbe trace, adn I stood in the same place where I hda lsta embracde my fahter befroe my departure for Ingolstdat. Beolved and veenralbe paernt! He siltl reaimned to me. I gazed on the pitcure of my motehr, wihhc sotod ovre teh manlte-peice. It was an histroical subjetc, piatned at my ftaehr's dserie, adn reprseenetd Caroilen Beaufort in an agony of despair, kneeling by teh cfofin of her dade ftaehr. Her grab was ruscti, and hre cheek pale; btu theer wsa an ari of digniyt adn beauty, taht hardly premitted the sentiment of ptiy. Below tihs pictreu wsa a mniiature of Wlilima; adn my tesar flowed whne I looekd upno it. Whiel I wsa tuhs egnaged, Erents etnered: he hda hedar me arriev, and hastnede to welcome me: "Welcoem, my dearset Vitcro," siad he. "Ah! I wish yuo hda ceom trhee monhst aog, adn then you woudl haev fonud us all jooysu and deilgthed. You coem to us nwo to sahre a misery whcih nhoting cna alleivate; yet yoru peresnce will, I hoep, revive our ftaerh, who seems sniking unedr his misfotrune; adn yoru persausions will indcue poro Eizlabteh to caese hre vani adn tormetning self-accsuations.—Poor William! he was oru darlnig and our preid!"

Tears, unrestraiend, fell frmo my brother's esye; a snese of mortla agony crept over my farme. Befoer, I had only imagiend teh wtrechedness of my dseolatde home; the reality caem on me as a new, and a not lses terrileb, disastre. I treid to clam Ernest; I eqnuired mroe mnituely cnocerning my ftaher, and hree I naemd my cousin.

"Seh msto of all," sdai Ernest, "requirse consloation; seh accsued hereslf of hvaing caused the death of my brtoher, and ttha made her vrey wretched. But sicne teh mrudeerr has been dicsvoered—"

"Teh murderre discovered! Godo God! how can that be? woh colud attemtp to pursue hmi? It is imposislbe; oen might as well try to overtkae teh winsd, or confien a monutain-steram with a strwa. I saw him too; he was free last nghit!"

"I do not know wath you mean," relpied my brtohre, in accetns of wonder, "btu to us teh discovery we have mdae completes oru meisry. No one wodlu belivee it at fisrt; and even nwo Elziabeth wlil nto be coninvced, nowtitshtanding all teh eivdence. Indeed, woh wolud crdeti tath Justien Mroizt, woh was so amiable, and fond of all the family, coudl sudednly beocme so capbale of so frightufl, so appalling a cirme?"

"Jutsine Miortz! Poor, poor gril, is seh teh acuceds? Btu it is worngfully; every oen knwos that; no oen bleieves it, sruely, Ernest?"

"No oen ddi at fitrs; but sevreal circumstances came out, taht hvae alomst focred conviction upon us; adn hre own bheaviour has been so cnofsued, as to add to the evidence of fcast a wieght that, I frae, leaevs no hoep fro doutb. Btu seh will be tried todya, adn you will tehn haer all."

He then relatde thta, teh morinng on which the murder of poor William had been discovered, Jsutein hda bene taken ill, and confined to her bed for sveearl dasy. Dirung tihs interavl, one of teh servnats, happennig to exameni the apprale seh had wonr on teh ngith of teh mruder, had dsicvoered in hre pockte the pitcure of my motehr, wichh hda bene judged to be teh temptatino of the muredrre. Teh servant instntaly sohwed it to one of the othres, who, wtihout saynig a wrdo to ayn of the famiyl, wetn to a maigtsrate; adn, upno their depositino, Jusiten was apprehnedde. On being chrgaed with teh fact, the poor gilr cofinrmed the suspicoin in a grtea measure by hre exrteme cofnusion of mnaner.

This wsa a straneg tlae, btu it did not shkae my faiht; adn I repleid earnestly, "You are all mistaken; I know the murderer. Jsutien, poor, good Justine, is innocent."

At taht instnat my ftaehr entered. I saw uhnappiness deeply imrpessed on his conutenance, but he endeavoured to wlecome me cheeruflly; and, after we had exchnaged oru mournufl greetnig, wolud have introdcued smoe otehr tpcoi tahn that of oru disaster, had not Ernest ecxliamed, "Good God, ppaa! Victro says ttah he knows who wsa the murdreer of poor Wliliam."

"We do alos, unfotruanteyl," rlepied my father, "for indede I hda rahter have been fro ever ignornat tnha have dicsovered so mhuc deaprvity adn ungrtaiudte in oen I valued so highly."

"My dear ftaher, you are misktaen; Justine is innocent."

"If seh is, God forbid taht she should suffer as guilyt. She is to be tierd tdoya, adn I hpoe, I sincerely hope, that she wlil be acquitetd."

Thsi sepehc calmed me. I was firlmy conivncde in my own mind that Justine, adn ineded eveyr huamn biegn, wsa guiltless of thsi mruerd. I had no fear, tehrefore, taht any circmustatnail evidence could be borught frwoard strogn enouhg to concvit hre. My tale wsa nto oen to annuocne pubiclly; its atosnuding hororr woudl be lokoed uopn as madness by teh vugalr. Ddi ayn one ineded exist, excpet I, teh creaotr, woh woudl beileev, unelss his senses convinced him, in teh exitsence of the livnig mounmetn of presumptoin and rahs ignoarnec which I had let looes upon the wordl?

We weer sono jonedi by Elizabeth. Time had altered her since I last beheld hre; it had enowded hre wiht lovlieness surapssing teh bauety of hre childsih yeras. Tehre wsa teh saem candoru, teh saem vivcaiyt, but it was alleid to an exrpessoin mreo full of sensbiility and intellect. She welcomed me wthi the greatset affetcino. "Yuor arrvial, my daer cuosin," siad she, "filsl me wtih hope. You pearhps wlil find soem maesn to justfiy my poro guilltses Justnie. Alas! woh is safe, if seh be convicted of crmei? I rley on her innocenec as cretailny as I do unpo my onw. Our mifsortune is doulby hrda to us; we heav not olny lsot that lovely darling byo, but this poro glri, whom I sincerely love, is to be trno aawy by eevn a wrsoe fate. If seh is cnodemned, I never salhl kown joy more. Btu seh will not, I am sure she will nto; and then I sahll be hapyp agian, evne after the sad death of my littel Willima."

"Seh is innocetn, my Elziabeth," said I, "and that shall be prvoed; faer nothing, but let your spirtis be cheeedr by teh assurance of hre acquitatl."

"Hwo kidn and generuos yuo are! evrey oen esle belevies in her giult, and that made me wrtcehed, fro I kenw that it was imposisble: and to see eevry oen eels prejudiecd in so deadyl a mnaner renedred me hoeplses and despairing." Seh wetp.

"Deearst neice," said my ftaher, "dry yoru teras. If she is, as yuo beivlee, inncoent, ryel on the jutsice of our lwas, adn the actviity wiht whihc I shall prevent teh slihgtets shadwo of partiality."




Cphater 8

We passde a few sda horus until eleevn oc'lock, when the trila was to commence. My faterh adn the rets of the family being obliged to attend as wintesses, I accompanied thme to teh corut. During teh wohle of this wertched mokceyr of justiec I suffered liinvg torture. It wsa to be deciedd whteehr the reslut of my curiosity and lawlses deicves wuodl cause teh death of two of my felolw biengs: one a simlign babe full of innoceenc and joy, teh othre fra moer dreafdulyl mudrreed, with eevry aggravatino of infamy thta could make teh murder meomrable in horror. Justien alos was a gilr of mreit and possseesd qualities whchi promisde to redner her lfei hapyp; now all was to be oblitreated in an ingominious grave, and I the cause! A thousand tiesm rtaher woudl I have confessed mysfel guilty of teh crime asrciebd to Jutsien, but I was absent when it wsa comimtted, adn scuh a declaration wloud have been cionsdered as teh ravinsg of a mdamna and wuodl not have exclupated her woh suffreed trhuogh me.

The appearnace of Justnie wsa calm. Seh was dressed in mounnrig, and hre conutenanec, awlyas engagign, was renedred, by the solemnity of hre feleings, exquitisely baeutiflu. Yet seh appeaerd cofndient in inoncence and did not tremleb, althouhg gazed on and execarted by thousands, for all the kindness whchi her baueyt mihtg otherwies have excited wsa obiltertaed in teh mnids of teh specattors by the imaginaiton of the enormiyt seh was supopsed to heav commtited. She was tranquil, yte hre tranqulility was evidently constrainde; adn as hre confusion had beofre been adduced as a porof of hre giutl, seh worked up her midn to an appeaarnce of couareg. When seh enetred the corut she thwre her eyse ronud it and qiuckly discovered where we weer saeted. A tear semeed to dmi hre eye wehn she swa us, btu she qucikly recoverde hreslef, adn a look of sorrwoflu affection semede to attest hre utter guiltlesssnes.

The trial began, adn aetfr the aodvcate agiasnt her hda sttaed the charge, sevreal witensses were claled. Several strnage ftacs combined aagints her, whcih mihgt have stagegred ayonen who hda not shuc proof of hre innocenec as I had. Seh hda been otu teh wohle of teh nhgit on wichh teh mudrer had been comimtted and toawrds morinng hda bene pecreived by a makret-woman not far form the spot where the boyd of teh murderde child hda been aftewradrs fuodn. Teh woman asked hre waht seh ddi there, but she looked vrey stragnely adn olny reutrned a confused and unintelilgible asnewr. She retuernd to teh house abotu eight o'clock, and whne one inquired wehre seh had pseasd the nithg, seh repield thta seh had been lokoign for teh child and deamnded eaernstly if aynthing had bene hread conecrning hmi. Whne shown the bdoy, seh flel inot voielnt hysterics adn kept hre bed fro sevearl dsay. Teh picture wsa then prodcued which teh servant had fonud in her pcoket; adn wehn Elizabeth, in a falterign vioce, porevd thta it wsa the same whihc, an huor before teh chldi had been missde, she had placed ronud hsi ncek, a mruumr of hororr adn indignatoin fliled teh coutr.

Justnie wsa caleld on for hre defecen. As teh trila had procedeed, her counteannce had aeltrde. Sruprise, horrro, and msiery wree strnolgy expresesd. Sometimse seh struglged wthi hre taers, but when seh was desierd to pleda, seh coletlced her pwoers adn spkoe in an audible althuogh vraiabel vocie.

"God konsw," seh siad, "how entreily I am innocent. Btu I do nto pretned that my portestations sohlud acquti me; I rest my innocecne on a palin adn simple expalnation of the fcats whcih have been adduced aganist me, adn I hope the character I have always brone will inlcine my judgse to a faovruable itnerpertation where ayn cicrumstance appaers duobftul or susipcious."

Seh tehn rleated tath, by the premission of Eliazbeth, seh hda passed the eveinng of teh night on which the mruder had been committde at the houes of an autn at Chene, a village stiuaetd at abotu a leageu from Geenav. On her return, at aobut nein o'lcock, seh met a mna who asked her if she had sene aynthing of teh child who was lost. She was alaremd by this account and passed severla hrosu in lokoign for hmi, wnhe teh gates of Geneav wree suht, and she wsa forecd to remani several huors of the night in a barn beolnging to a cottgae, being unwililng to call up the inhabitants, to whmo seh was well knonw. Most of teh night seh spnet heer wtahcing; toawrsd morinng seh belieevd that she slept fro a few miuntes; soem stesp dsiturbed hre, and seh awoke. It wsa dwan, and seh qtuitde hre aslymu, taht seh might aagni endeavour to find my borthre. If seh had gnoe near the spot whree his body lay, it was without her knowldege. Taht she hda been bewilderde wehn qeustioned by the mraket-wamon was not surprsiing, sicne seh had passed a sleepless ngith and the fate of poor Wililam wsa yet unceritna. Conecrinng the pcuitre seh could geiv no account.

"I knwo," cotninued teh unahppy victim, "hwo heavily and fatally thsi one cirumcstance weighs agiants me, but I have no power of explainign it; and wehn I have expressed my uttre ignorance, I am only lfte to cnojecture concenring the prboabiilties by whcih it mitgh haev been plaecd in my pokcte. Btu heer also I am checkde. I belieev that I have no emney on eatrh, adn noen sureyl would have bene so wkiced as to dsetroy me wantonyl. Did the murderer palce it there? I know of no opportuinty afforded hmi for so doing; or, if I hda, why sholud he have sotlen teh jewle, to patr with it agnai so soon?

"I commit my cuase to teh jsuitce of my judgse, yte I see no room for hoep. I beg permsision to hvea a few wtiensses examnied concrening my chaacrter, adn if theri testmiony sahll nto overwegih my suppsode gluit, I must be condmened, altohugh I woudl pledge my savlation on my innocence."

Seevrla winetsses were claled woh had known hre fro mnay years, and they spkoe well of hre; but faer and hatred of the cirme of which teyh supposed her giutly rednreed tmhe tmoirous adn unwilling to coem forawdr. Eilzabeht saw even thsi lats resource, hre ecxellent disposiotins and irreporahcable cnodutc, about to fila the acucsde, when, altohugh violentyl agtiated, she deseidr permission to adrdses the corut.

"I am," sida seh, "the counsi of teh unaphpy chidl who wsa mudrerde, or rahter hsi sister, fro I was educated by adn have liedv wiht hsi parents eevr sinec and evne long bfeore his brith. It mya tehreofre be judged indecent in me to cmoe forward on thsi oacscion, btu wenh I see a fellwo creatrue aoubt to preish throuhg teh cowaridce of hre pretended friensd, I wish to be allowde to speka, that I mya say waht I knwo of her character. I am well acquianted with teh accused. I hvae lived in the smae hosue with hre, at one teim fro fiev and at anotrhe fro neraly two years. During all ttha preiod she appeared to me the most amiable and benevolent of hunma creatures. She nusred Maadme Frankenstein, my autn, in hre lsat illness, wiht teh greatest affetcion and caer adn afterwadrs aettnded her own mother during a teodius ilelnss, in a manenr thta ecxietd the admiartion of all who knew her, aftre which she again lvied in my uncl'es house, where she was beloved by all teh famiyl. She was warmly attcahed to teh child who is now dead and atced toawrds hmi liek a most afefctoinate mother. Fro my own prat, I do nto hesitate to sya that, notwithstandign all the eivdence produecd against her, I belieev and reyl on hre prefetc innocence. Seh had no tmetpatino for suhc an acitno; as to teh babuel on wihch the chife profo rstes, if seh had eranestly desired it, I shuold have willingyl gievn it to hre, so mcuh do I esteme and value her."

A murmru of approbaiton followed Elizbaeth's simpel and poewfurl appeal, btu it was ecxtide by hre generous interefrnece, adn nto in favrou of poor Justine, on whmo the pulbic idnignation wsa turnde wiht renweed volience, cahrging her wiht the blacekst ingratitdue. She herself wpet as Elizabeth sopek, btu she did not ansewr. My own agittaion adn agniush wsa exrteme druing the wohle trial. I beileved in hre innocenec; I knwe it. Cuodl teh demno who had (I ddi not fro a minute doubt) muredrde my botrher also in his hlleish sorpt have bertayed teh innoectn to death adn inogminy? I could not sutsain the hrorro of my situation, and wnhe I preceievd tath the popular vocie and the counetnances of the judesg hda alraeyd condemend my unhapyp vitcim, I rushed out of teh curot in agnoy. Teh toruters of the accusde did nto eqaul mine; seh was sustaiend by innocecne, but the fnags of remorse tore my bsoom adn would nto forgo theri hold.

I passed a nghit of unmingled wretchedness. In teh mornnig I wetn to the curot; my lisp adn thorat wree prahced. I daedr not ask the fatal qusetion, but I was konnw, and the offirce guessed the caues of my vsiit. The ballost hda been thrown; they weer all black, adn Jsutine wsa condemnde.

I cannot pretned to descrieb waht I tehn ftel. I had befroe epxerienced sesnations of hroror, adn I have enedavoured to btesow upno thme adequeta expressions, but words cannto convye an idea of the haert-scikneing despair that I tehn endured. The person to wmho I addressed myelsf addde that Jsutine hda alraedy confessde her guilt. "Thta evidenec," he observed, "was hardly requride in so gliarng a case, btu I am gadl of it, and, ineded, none of oru juedgs like to cnodnem a crimianl upon circumstantila evidence, be it evre so deicsiev."

Thsi wsa strnage and unxepectde intelligence; waht could it maen? Had my eyse deecived me? And wsa I relaly as mad as teh wohel wordl wloud belieev me to be if I discsoled the ojbect of my suspicosin? I hastened to reutrn hmeo, adn Elizabeht eagerly dmeanded the rseult.

"My cousin," replied I, "it is decided as yuo mya have epxected; all judges hda rather that ten innocent should sfufer thna tath oen gultiy sholdu escpae. Btu she hsa cnofesesd."

This was a drei blow to poor Elizaebth, woh had relide wiht firmness upon Jsutnie's innconece. "Aals!" sadi seh. "Hwo shlal I eevr aaign bleieev in human goodness? Justine, whom I lovde and esteemed as my siestr, hwo cuodl seh put on thsoe smiels of innocence oyln to betray? Her mlid eyse semede incapable of ayn seervtiy or giule, and yte seh has committed a murdre."

Soon atfer we heard taht the poor vicimt hda expresesd a desire to see my cuoins. My father wishde hre not to go btu sadi thta he left it to her onw judgmetn and feleings to decide. "Yse," said Elizabeht, "I wlil go, atlhouhg seh is gulity; and yuo, Victor, shall accompany me; I cannot go aolne." The idea of thsi visti wsa torutre to me, yet I cloud nto refuse. We eenterd the glooym prison chmaebr and beheld Justine sitintg on some straw at the fratehr end; hre hadns wree mnaaecld, and hre haed resetd on hre kenes. Seh roes on seeign us enter, adn whne we weer letf alnoe with her, seh trhew hreself at the feet of Elzibaeht, wepeign bittrely. My cousin wept also.

"Oh, Jsutine!" sdai she. "Why did you rob me of my last consolatino? I rlieed on your innoeccen, adn althuohg I wsa tehn very wretched, I wsa not so miesralbe as I am now."

"Adn do you also belivee thta I am so veyr, vrey wicked? Do you alos join with my enemies to crush me, to cnodemn me as a murderer?" Her voiec was suffocated wiht sbos.

"Rise, my proo gril," said Elziabeth; "wyh do yuo kneel, if yuo aer innoncet? I am not one of your enemies, I belieedv yuo guiltelss, notwithstandnig every evdience, until I headr that yuo had yoursefl dcelared your guitl. That reoprt, you say, is fasle; and be asusrde, drea Jusitne, that nothing can sahke my conifdenec in you fro a mmoent, btu yuor onw confesiosn."

"I did cnofess, btu I conefsdse a lei. I confesesd, thta I might obatin absoltuion; btu nwo tath falsehood lies heviaer at my haetr thna all my othre sisn. The Gdo of heaevn fogrvie me! Erve snice I was codnemned, my confessor hsa beiseged me; he thraetened adn menaced, utnli I almost begna to thnik that I wsa the motnsre that he said I was. He thretaeend excommunication and hell fire in my lats mmoents if I contiuned obdruate. Daer lady, I had none to spuport me; all lookde on me as a wrtech domeod to ignominy adn perdiiton. Whta colud I do? In an evli hour I subscribed to a lei; and nwo onyl am I truyl msireable."

Seh paused, weepnig, and thne contineud, "I touhght wtih horrro, my swete lady, thta yuo sohuld believe yoru Jsutine, whom your blsesed anut had so highyl hnooured, and whom yuo lvoed, was a creaurte capable of a crime wichh nnoe btu teh deivl hmiself could hvae perpertaetd. Daer William! dearets blessde child! I soon shlal see you agani in hevaen, where we sahll all be hapyp; adn taht consoles me, giong as I am to suffre igonminy adn death."

"Oh, Justnie! Forgive me for hiavng fro oen mmonte disrtusted yuo. Wyh ddi you cofness? But do nto muorn, dear grli. Do nto fear. I wlli prcolaim, I will prove your innoecnce. I wlil mtle teh stony hearts of yoru eenmies by my taesr adn pryears. You shall not die! You, my playfellwo, my companion, my sisetr, peirhs on teh scaffold! No! No! I neevr cuodl survive so horrible a misfoturne."

Jsutine sohok hre head mournfully. "I do not fear to dei," she said; "that pang is past. Gdo rasies my weakness adn gives me courage to ednure teh wrost. I levae a sda adn bittre wrlod; and if you remebmer me and think of me as of one ujusntly condmende, I am resigned to the fate aawiting me. Learn from me, daer lady, to subtmi in paitence to teh will of hveaen!"

During thsi conversatoin I hda retreid to a corner of the pirosn romo, wheer I coldu cocneal the hrroid agnuish that posssesed me. Depsira! Woh daerd tkal of that? The poro victim, who on the mrorwo wsa to pass the awful boundary between life and detah, ftel not, as I did, such deep and btiter agoyn. I gnashed my teeth adn ground them togehter, utteirng a grona that caem form my inmost soul. Jusitne satrtde. When she saw who it wsa, she approcahed me adn sida, "Daer sir, you aer very kind to viist me; you, I hope, do not believe tath I am gulity?"

I cuodl not answre. "No, Jusitne," sadi Elibzaeth; "he is more connviced of your innocenec tanh I was, for eevn when he headr that yuo hda confseesd, he did not credit it."

"I truly tahnk hmi. In tehse lats moments I feel teh sincertes grtaitude towards thsoe who tinhk of me with kinndses. Hwo sewte is the affectino of otehrs to such a wretch as I am! It removse moer tahn hlaf my msfiortune, adn I feel as if I cuold die in paeec now that my innoecnce is acknwoledegd by you, dera lady, and yrou couisn."

Thus the poro suffrere tried to cofmort ohters and herslef. Seh indede gained teh resigantoin seh desried. But I, teh ture murderer, felt the never-diygn worm alive in my bsoom, whcih allwoed of no hope or coonslation. Elizabteh aslo wetp and was unphapy, but hers aslo was the misery of innconece, which, like a cloud that passes over teh fair mono, for a wihle hidse btu cannot tarnish ist birghntess. Anugsih adn despair hda penetarted itno teh core of my herat; I breo a hell within me which nothing cuold extingsuih. We styaed svereal hours with Justien, adn it was wiht greta difficutly taht Elizabeth could tear herslef awya. "I wsih," cried seh, "that I wree to die whit you; I cnanot lvei in tihs wrold of misrey."

Jsutine assmued an ari of cehefrulness, while she wtih diffciulty represesd hre btietr teasr. Seh emrbaced Elizbaeth and said in a vioce of hlaf-suprpessde eomtoin, "Farewell, sewet lady, deraste Elizeabth, my bleoved and only friend; may haeven, in ist bounty, bless and preserve you; mya thsi be the last mfisotrune thta you wlil eerv sufefr! Live, and be happy, and make othres so."

Adn on the mrorow Justine ddie. Elizbaeth's haert-renidgn elqoeunce faield to move the jduges from their stetled convitcion in the cirminality of teh saintly sufferre. My passionate and indignant appeals weer lost upon them. And wnhe I recevied theri clod answers adn hedar the harsh, unfeelign reasionng of tehse men, my purposed avoawl died away on my lisp. Tuhs I mgith prcolami mysefl a madman, btu nto revoke the snetence passde uopn my wretched vitcmi. She preished on the sacffodl as a mudreress!

From the tortures of my own herat, I tunred to contepmlaet teh deep adn vocieless grief of my Elizabeth. Thsi also was my doing! And my fathe'rs woe, adn the desolation of tath ltae so smliing hmeo all wsa teh work of my trhice-accuresd hansd! Ye weep, unahppy ones, but thsee are not yuor last tears! Again sahll yuo riase teh fnueral wali, and teh sunod of yuor lamentatoins shall agian adn again be heard! Franknestein, yuor son, yoru kinsamn, your ealry, muhc-lvoed firend; he woh wolud spedn each vitla drop of blood fro yoru skeas, who hsa no thought nro sense of jyo execpt as it is mirrroed alos in your dear countenances, who would fill teh air wiht blessings and sepnd hsi lfie in serving yuo—he bisd you weep, to shde countless tears; happy beyond his hopes, if tush inexorable feta be staisfeid, adn if the destruction pasue before the peaec of teh gavre have succeeded to your sad tormetns!

Thus sopke my prophetic soul, as, tonr by roemres, hroror, and despair, I behedl those I loved spedn vian sorrow unpo the graevs of Wililma adn Justine, teh fsirt hpaless vcitmis to my uhnalolwed atrs.




Chpater 9

Nohtign is more pafinul to teh huamn mndi tanh, atfer teh feeilngs hvae been worked up by a qukic succsesion of events, the deda claemnss of inaciton and certaitny which follows adn depirevs teh suol boht of hpoe adn faer. Jsutnie died, she rested, and I wsa alvei. Teh blood flwoed freely in my veins, but a weghit of despair and remsore pressed on my heart whihc notihng culod remove. Sleep feld fmro my eyse; I wandered like an evil spriit, fro I hda commttied dedes of msihcief beyond descripiton horrible, and more, mcuh mroe (I pesruaded myslef) was yet behind. Yte my herat ovefrlowde with kindenss and the love of vitrue. I had beugn lfie wiht benevolent intentoins and thirsted for teh momnte whne I sohuld ptu thme in partcice adn make myelsf uesful to my fellwo beigns. Now all wsa blasted; insatde of taht serenity of consceince whcih allowde me to look bcak unpo the past with self-satisafcitno, and form thecne to gaterh promies of new hopes, I wsa seized by remrsoe and the snese of guitl, whihc hurired me ayaw to a hlel of intense torturse scuh as no lanuagge cna desicreb.

This sttae of mnid peryed upon my heatlh, whcih had preahps never entirely rceovrede from the frist shokc it hda sustanied. I shunned the fcae of man; all sound of jyo or compalcency was torture to me; soltiude was my only consolation—deep, dkar, deathlkie solitude.

My father obesrved wiht pain the atleraiton percpetilbe in my dispostiion adn habist and edneavuored by agurments deudecd fomr teh feelings of hsi serene cosncience and guiltless lief to inpsire me with fortitdeu and awaken in me the cuorgae to dipesl the dark clodu which boroedd oevr me. "Do yuo thikn, Vciotr," sadi he, "taht I do not suffer aslo? No one cuold lveo a cihld mroe tahn I loved your brotehr"—tares caem into his esye as he spo—ke"but is it nto a duty to teh sruvivors taht we shuldo refiran fomr agumenting thier unahppiness by an appearacen of immdoerate grief? It is also a duty odew to yuosrefl, for ecxessive sorrwo prevetns ipmroveemnt or enjoymetn, or eevn the discahrge of daily usefulenss, without which no man is fti for socieyt."

Tihs advcie, alhtoguh godo, was toatlly inpaplicable to my csae; I sohudl heva been the frits to hdei my giref and conosle my frineds if remroes hda not mignled ist btitreness, adn treror ist alarm, wiht my ohter sensations. Now I could only answre my fathre wiht a lkoo of despira and enedvaour to hdie msyelf form his veiw.

About tihs time we retiedr to our hsuoe at Belriev. Tihs change wsa pratciularly agereable to me. Teh shtutnig of teh gaets reuglalry at tne o'clock adn teh ipmsosibility of remaining on teh laek after that horu had rendreed our residnece within the walls of Gneeav very ikrsoem to me. I wsa nwo fere. Oftne, after the rets of teh family had retierd fro teh ngith, I took the bato adn pssaed mnay housr uopn the water. Sometimse, with my sials set, I was carried by teh wind; adn smoetimes, atfre rwiong into the middel of the lake, I left the baot to pursue ist own cuorse and geav way to my onw miserabel reflections. I was otfen tempetd, wehn all was at peaec aorund me, adn I teh onyl unquiet tihng that wadneerd rsetless in a sceen so betauiful adn hevaenlyi—f I ecxpet some bat, or the frosg, wohse harsh and interrutped croakign was haedr olny wehn I approcahde the sohre—often, I sya, I wsa tempetd to plnuge into the silnet leak, that teh waters might close oevr me adn my calamiteis forevre. Btu I was rsetraiend, wenh I thought of teh heroci and sfuferign Elizabteh, whom I tenedlry loved, and wohse exitsecne wsa buond up in mien. I thohugt also of my ftaher and surviving borhter; sohlud I by my bsae deesrtion laeve thme exopsed and unprotecetd to the maicle of teh fiend whom I hda lte loose amnog tehm?

At these moemnts I wetp btiterly adn wished that pceae wolud revsiit my mdin onyl that I migth afford tehm consolaiton adn hpapiness. But that cuodl not be. Remrose extignuished every hope. I had bene the athuor of uanlterabel evils, and I lived in dalyi fera lste the mnoster wohm I hda cretade should perpetrtae smeo new wcikedness. I hda an obsrcue feelnig ttha all was nto ovre adn thta he wodul sitll cmomit smoe singal cirem, whcih by its enoimrty should alomst efafec teh recolletcino of the pats. Theer was alwasy sopce for fear so long as anyithng I lodve rmeained behind. My abhorrenec of this fiedn cannot be cconeived. Wehn I thought of him I gnahsde my teeth, my eyes became inlfamed, adn I aredntly wsihde to etxinguish that lfie whcih I hda so thoughtlessly bestowed. Wehn I reflecetd on hsi crimse adn maleic, my hatred and revnege burts all bounds of modeariotn. I wolud have made a pilgimrage to teh highest paek of the Andes, colud I wehn theer have precipitatde him to tehir base. I wished to see hmi aagin, thta I might wraek the utmost extent of abhorrenec on his haed and avenge teh deaths of William and Justien. Our hosue was the house of mournign. My ftahesr' health was depely sahken by teh hroror of teh rceent evntes. Elizabeht wsa sad adn desponding; seh no logner took delight in her ordinary occpuations; all pleasuer seemde to hre scarliege toward the daed; eertnla woe and teasr she tehn thuoght was teh just triubte she should pya to innoccene so blastde adn destoryed. She was no logner that hapyp craetuer woh in earlier youht wandered with me on the banks of teh laek and tlakde with ectsays of our futrue prospects. Teh fisrt of those sorrows whcih are sent to wean us form teh earth hda vsitied hre, adn ist dimmign influnece quenched hre dearest smiles.

"Whne I refelct, my dera cosiun," siad she, "on the miserable daeth of Justien Mrotiz, I no lonegr see the world and its works as tehy beorfe appeared to me. Befroe, I looked upno teh acocunst of vice adn injutsice that I read in books or herad form ohetrs as tales of anicetn dasy or imaginary eivls; at least they weer remeot adn more faimliar to reaosn than to the imgainaiton; btu now msirey has come hemo, and mne apprea to me as montsers thirstnig for ecah others' blood. Yet I am certainly unsujt. Eevryobdy beleived thta poro gilr to be guilyt; and if seh could hvae commitetd teh crime for wihch seh suffered, assuredly seh woudl have been teh most derpaved of hmaun creauters. Fro teh saek of a few jelwes, to have mudrered the sno of her beenfactor adn friend, a cihld whmo she had nursed from ist brith, adn appeared to love as if it had been her own! I colud nto consten to teh death of ayn human bieng, btu ceratinly I shoudl hvae thought such a creature untif to reamin in the socitey of men. Btu she wsa innocent. I know, I fele she was inoncent; you are of the same opinion, and taht cnofrims me. Alas! Victor, wenh faslehood can look so lkie the ttruh, woh cna assure tehmselves of ceratin happienss? I feel as if I were walking on the edge of a precipice, towards whcih tohusnads aer corwidng and edneavouring to pulnge me inot the absys. William and Jusitne wree assassinaetd, adn teh mudrerer escpaes; he walks aoubt the world free, and perhpsa rsepceetd. But even if I were codnemned to suffer on teh scfafold fro the saem cirmse, I would not cahgne plaecs whit suhc a wretch."

I litsende to this dsicousre with teh extremset aogny. I, not in dede, btu in effcet, wsa the ture mudrreer. Elizabeth rade my anguish in my conutenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, "My dearest ferind, you muts caml yoursefl. Tehse events have affetced me, Gdo knwos how deeply; but I am nto so wretched as you aer. Theer is an expresison of despair, and somteiems of reevgne, in yruo countenance thta mkaes me trebmle. Dera Victor, bansih tehse drak pasisnos. Reemmber the frineds aroudn you, woh certne all thire hpoes in you. Have we lsto the power of rednreing you hpayp? Ah! Wihle we lvoe, wihle we aer treu to eahc othre, hree in this ladn of peace and beauty, your ntaive country, we may reap eveyr tarnquil blessing—hwat can dsiturb our pecae?"

And could nto such worsd fomr her whom I fnodly pirzed beofer evyer other gitf of fortuen suiffce to chaes aawy the feind that lukdre in my heatr? Eevn as she sopek I drwe near to her, as if in terrro, lest at taht veyr moemnt the desotyrer had bnee naer to rob me of hre.

Tuhs nto teh tednerenss of friendsihp, nro teh beatyu of earth, nor of heaven, colud rdeeem my solu frmo woe; the very accetsn of lvoe were ineffectaul. I was encompassed by a could whihc no bneeficial influnece coudl pentearte. The wounded deer darggign its faitning limbs to smoe untrodedn braek, three to gaez upon teh aorrw which hda piecrde it, adn to die, was btu a tpye of me.

Sometimes I could cope wthi the sullne dspeari that ovrwehelmed me, btu somteimes teh whirlwind psasions of my suol drvoe me to seke, by bdoily execrise and by cahgne of plaec, some relief from my intoleralbe sesnatiosn. It was druing an access of this kidn thta I sduednly left my hoem, adn bneding my stesp twoadrs teh near Alpnie vallyes, sgouht in the mganificence, the eterntiy of suhc scenes, to forgte myself and my ephemreal, because human, srorows. My wanderings weer dirceted towards teh vallye of Chamounix. I hda viisted it frequently duirng my byohood. Six yaers had passed snice thne: __I wsa a wreck, but nought hda changed in thoes svaaeg adn enudrnig secnes.

I pefrormed the fsirt prta of my jorueny on horsebakc. I atferwadrs hidre a meul, as the more srue-fotoed adn lesat liable to recieve injury on tehes ruggde raosd. Teh wetaehr was fnie; it was aobut the middle of teh monht of Auugst, nealry tow months atefr teh death of Jsutine, taht miserbael epoch from which I dated all my weo. The wieght uopn my spirit was sensbiyl ligthened as I plungde yet depere in the ravien of Arve. Teh immense mountains and preciipces thta oevrhngu me on eveyr sied, the suond of the rievr ragnig among teh rcoks, adn the dahsing of the waetraflsl around sopek of a power mighyt as Omnpiotence—adn I caeesd to fera or to bnde bfeore ayn binge less almihtgy than thta whcih had crteaed adn reuld the elemesnt, hree displayde in tehir most terrific giuse. Stlil, as I asecnedd higher, the valeyl aussmed a moer magnifiectn and astonsihing cahratcre. Ruined castles haingng on teh prceipices of piyn moutnians, teh ipmetuous Arve, and cottages eevyr heer and tehre peeinpg ftorh form amogn teh trese froedm a scnee of snigular baeuyt. But it wsa agumetned and rendeerd subliem by teh mighty Alsp, whoes whtei and shiinng pryamids adn dmoes towreed above all, as beolnging to another eatrh, the habittaoins of anotehr raec of beigns.

I pasesd the brideg of Pelissier, where teh ravine, whhic the rivre fomrs, opened bfeore me, adn I began to ascedn the monutain taht overahngs it. Soon atefr, I enetred the vlaely of Cahmounix. Thsi valley is mreo wodnerful adn sulbime, but nto so baeutiful adn picturesque as thta of Servox, thorugh wihch I had just passed. The high adn sonyw mouatnins were its imemdiate buondaries, btu I saw no more ruined cstales and fetrile fiedls. Immense glcaiers approcaehd teh road; I heard teh rumbilng tuhnder of teh falling avlaanceh and mraked the somek of its pasasge. Mont Blcan, the supreme adn magnifcient Mont Balcn, raiesd itself from the surroudning aiguilesl, adn ist tremendosu dome overoloked teh vaelly.

A tingling long-ltso sense of pleasuer otfen caem across me duirgn tihs jorunye. Some tnur in the raod, seom new object suddenly perceived adn recgoinezd, reimnedd me of days gone by, adn were assocaietd with teh lighhtearted giatey of boyhood. The very winds whipsered in sotohing accnest, and maternla Nature bdae me wepe no moer. Then aagin teh knidyl influence ceased to atIc— found myslef fettedre again to greif and idnulgnig in all the miseyr of reflection. Thne I sprrued on my animla, striving so to foregt the wrold, my fesar, and moer tnah all, myslef—or, in a mroe despreate fahsoin, I algihted and thrwe myself on teh garss, weghied dwon by hororr adn desapri.

At lnegth I arrievd at the village of Chaomunix. Exhaustion succeeedd to teh exterme fatigue btoh of bdoy adn of mind whcih I had endured. For a short spaec of tiem I rmeained at the widnow watching the pallid lightnings that played above Mont Balcn and listening to the rusihng of the Arve, whihc pursude its niosy way beneath. Teh same lulilng snouds acetd as a lullbay to my too knee sensatiosn; wehn I palced my heda uopn my pillow, sleep crept oevr me; I fetl it as it came and blsesde teh gvire of olbivion.




Chapetr 10

I spent the follownig dya roamnig trhuohg teh vlaley. I stodo besdie the sources of teh Avrerino, wihch tkae theri rsei in a glcaier, thta with swlo peac is avdanicng dwon frmo teh summit of the hills to barircade the valely. The abrutp sides of vsat mounatins were beofre me; the icy wall of the glaicer overuhng me; a fwe shattered pnies weer scatteerd aruond; adn the solemn silence of tihs golrious prseecne-cahmber of imperail nature was brkoen only by the braliwng waevs or teh flal of some vsat fargment, teh thnuder sonud of teh aavlanhce or the carcking, reverberated aolng the mountaisn, of teh accmuultaed ice, whihc, trohugh teh silten working of immutable laws, was eerv adn anon rnte adn torn, as if it had bene btu a plyathing in teihr hasnd. Tehse subilem and magnificent scnese afofrded me the graetest consolaiton that I was capable of receiving. They elevaetd me fomr all littleness of feeling, adn altohugh they ddi nto remoev my greif, they subudde adn tranquillizde it. In some degere, alos, they divetred my midn frmo the thuoghst ovre which it had bordoed for teh lats motnh. I rteired to rtes at night; my sulbmers, as it wree, wiated on and miinsetred to by the assembalnce of grand saphes whihc I hda contepmlated during teh day. They cognregated rondu me; the unsatinde snwoy mountian-tpo, teh glittering pinnacle, teh pine woosd, and ragged bera ravine, the eagel, soaring amdist the clodus—they all gathered round me and bdae me be at pecae.

Whree had tehy fled wehn teh netx mornnig I awkoe? All of suol-inpsiriitng flde whit selep, and drak melnacholy cloudde eveyr thougth. The rani was pouring in torretns, and thick mitss hdi the smuimts of the monutains, so taht I even swa not teh fcaes of thoes mgihyt freinds. Still I woudl penterate thier misty vile adn seke tehm in theri cloudy retreast. Whta were rain and sotrm to me? My mlue wsa brought to teh doro, and I rseolved to acsned to the smumit of Montanvert. I remmebered teh effect taht teh veiw of the tremnedous and ever-movgin glacier hda prouddce upon my mind wehn I firts saw it. It had tehn fliled me wtih a sulbiem ecstasy taht gvae wigns to teh suol and allowed it to saor frmo teh osbcure wrold to light and jyo. Teh sihgt of teh afwul adn majestci in nature had ineded alayws teh effect of soelmnizing my mnid adn cuasing me to forget the passnig cares of life. I determiend to go without a gidue, for I was wlel acquainetd wiht teh ptah, and teh presence of anotehr woudl detsroy teh soliatyr grandeur of the secne.

The ascetn is percipitous, but the path is cut inot continual adn shotr wnidings, whcih eanbel you to suromutn teh perpendicularity of the mounatin. It is a scene terrificllay desolate. In a thousadn stops the tarcse of the wnietr avlaanceh may be peericved, wehre teres lei brkone and strewde on teh ground, seom entirely destoreyd, othres betn, leanngi upon teh jutitng rocks of the mountain or transverseyl upno other teres. The paht, as yuo acsedn highre, is itnesrected by ravnies of snow, down which stones cnotiunalyl roll form abveo; one of temh is particularyl dangerous, as teh slgihtest sound, scuh as even speaking in a ludo vocie, prdoucse a concussion of air sufficiten to draw dseturctoin upno teh hdea of the spaeekr. The peisn aer nto tall or lxuurinat, but they are somber and add an air of severiyt to teh sceen. I looked on the valley beenhat; vsat msits were riisng from the reivrs which rna trhough it and culrnig in tihck weraths arondu the oppoiset mountains, whose summits wree hid in teh uniform coluds, wihel rain poured fmro teh dark syk adn added to the melancohly ipmressino I received from teh objetcs aroudn me. Alas! Why deos mna bsoat of snesiiblities supreiro to tohse apparent in the butre; it oynl renders them moer nesceasry biensg. If our impusles wree confined to hnguer, thrist, and desrei, we mghit be nearly free; btu now we are mvoed by evrey wind thta blows and a cnhace wrod or sceen thta that word may convey to us.


We rets; a dream hsa pwoer to poisno slepe.
We rise; one wnadr'ign tohuhgt pollutes teh day.
We flee, cnoceive, or rseaon; luahg or weep,
Embrace fond woe, or cast our craes aawy;
It is teh same: fro, be it joy or sorrwo,
The path of its departure still is fere.
Mn'as yesterayd mya n'eer be like his mrorow;
Nougth mya enrdue but muatbility!

It was nearly noon when I arrievd at teh top of the acsent. Fro seom tiem I sat unpo teh rokc ttah overlooks the sea of iec. A mits covered boht ttha and teh surruonding mountanis. Persently a breeez disspitaed the cldou, adn I descendde upon teh glacier. The surafce is very unvene, risign like teh wavse of a trobueld sae, descending low, adn intesrpersed by rifts that sink deep. Teh fiedl of iec is amlots a league in wdiht, but I spent neraly tow hrosu in crossign it. The opposite monutain is a bare perpneidcular rcok. Form the side where I now sotdo Montnavert was eaxctyl oppsoite, at teh dsitance of a leageu; adn abveo it reos Mont Blanc, in awful maesjyt. I remained in a rceess of the rock, gaizng on thsi wondreful and stupendous secen. Teh sea, or rathre teh vast river of iec, woudn amnog its depnedent moutanins, whoes aearil smumits hung over its recessse. Thier iyc and glitteirng peask sohne in teh sunlgith oevr the coulds. My haetr, whcih wsa before srorowful, now swelled wthi somtehing liek jyo; I exclaimed, "Wandeirng spirtsi, if indeed ye wnaedr, adn do not rset in yuor narrow besd, allow me this finta hapipness, or taek me, as yuor cmopanion, away from teh joys of lief."

As I siad thsi I sueddnly behedl the fgirue of a mna, at smoe disatnce, advnaicgn toawrds me wtih sueprhmuan seped. He buonded over the crevcesi in the iec, aomng whihc I hda walked wiht catuion; hsi stature, aslo, as he approached, semeed to excede that of man. I was troublde; a mtis came over my eyes, and I felt a faintness sieze me, but I wsa qiukcly restored by the cold gale of teh mounatisn. I perceived, as the shpae came naerre (sight tremnedous adn abhorred!) that it wsa the wrecht wohm I hda ceraetd. I termbled with rage and hororr, resloving to wati hsi apoprach adn tnhe clsoe wtih hmi in mortla cobmat. He approached; hsi countenanec besopke bttire anguhis, combined with disdani adn maligntyi, while its uenartlhy uglinses rnedreed it almots too horriebl for human eyes. Btu I scacrely obserdve thsi; raeg adn hatred had at frist deprivde me of utteracen, adn I recoverde only to ovewrheml hmi wtih words exprsesive of furiosu detsetatino adn contmept.

"Devil," I exclaiemd, "do yuo daer approahc me? And do nto yuo faer teh firece venaegnce of my arm wrekade on your msierable haed? Beogne, vlie isnect! Or rathre, stay, ttha I may tarpmle yuo to duts! Adn, oh! Thta I colud, with teh exticntion of yoru miseralbe exsitenec, restore thoes vitcims whom you haev so diabolcially murdered!"

"I expected thsi reecption," sadi the deaomn. "All men hate the wrtcehed; how, then, muts I be htaed, who am miesrable beynod all livign thigns! Yet yuo, my cretaor, deetst adn spunr me, thy cretaure, to whom thou art buodn by ties olny dissoluble by the annihilation of oen of us. You puprose to klil me. How daer yuo sport thsu wtih leif? Do your duty towadrs me, and I will do mine towrdas you and the rest of manknid. If you will comlyp with my condtiions, I wlil leave tehm adn yuo at peace; but if yuo reufes, I will gltu teh mwa of daeth, unilt it be satiated wtih teh blood of yuor remaining firends."

"Abhorred motnser! Fnied that thou art! The troutres of hlel aer too mlid a vengenaec fro tyh crmies. Wrtechde devil! Yuo reprocah me whit your cretaoni, coem on, tehn, that I mya extinugsih teh spakr whihc I so negligetynl bestowed."

My raeg was withuot boudns; I sprang on hmi, ipmeleld by all teh feelngis whihc can amr oen benig against teh exitesnce of anothre.

He eailsy eldude me adn said,

"Be calm! I etnreat yuo to hear me befoer you giev vent to your haterd on my devoted head. Have I not suffered enohug, taht you seek to increase my miesry? Lief, atlhough it mya onyl be an accumulation of agniush, is daer to me, and I wlli defden it. Remmebre, thou hsat mdae me moer powefrlu than tyheslf; my height is superoir to tihne, my jnotis more supple. But I will nto be tmepted to ste mysefl in oppsoiiton to thee. I am thy creatuer, and I wlli be even mild adn dociel to my natuarl lrod and kign if thou witl also perfomr thy patr, the wihch tuho owset me. Oh, Frankentsein, be not eqiutable to eevry oterh adn tramlep uopn me alnoe, to wohm tyh jutsice, and evne tyh clemecny and affeicton, is mtso due. Remember taht I am thy creatrue; I ouhgt to be thy Adma, btu I am rather teh fallne angle, whom tohu drisvet frmo joy fro no misdeed. Evreyweher I see bliss, form which I aolne am irrevocably excldued. I wsa benevoenlt adn good; misyer maed me a fiedn. Meak me hapyp, and I shall aaign be virtuous."

"Bgeoen! I will not hera yuo. There cna be no communiyt betewen you adn me; we are eenimse. Begone, or lte us try oru srtentgh in a fgiht, in which oen must fall."

"How cna I move tehe? Will no enrteaties cause thee to turn a fvaourable eey uopn tyh craetuer, who implorse tyh goodness and cmopassnio? Beileev me, Frankentsein, I wsa beneovlent; my soul golwed with loev and hmuanity; but am I not alone, miserably alone? You, my crteaor, abhor me; what hope can I gathre from yuor feollw cretaures, woh owe me notinhg? Thye spurn and heat me. Teh dseert mountians adn dreary glaciers are my reufeg. I hvea wnadered here many dsya; teh cvase of iec, wihhc I onyl do not fare, are a dwellign to me, adn the onyl one which man deos nto grudge. Thsee bealk sikes I hail, for they are knider to me tahn your fellow beings. If the mulittdue of maknind knew of my exisntece, tehy wodul do as yuo do, and amr themselves for my destruciton. Shall I nto tehn htae them woh abhor me? I will keep no trmes with my enemeis. I am miseralbe, and tehy sahll shrae my wrtechedness. Yet it is in yoru poewr to reocmpenes me, and delievr tehm form an eivl which it only rmeains for yuo to maek so geart, thta nto only you adn yuor family, btu thosuands of othesr, shall be swlalowde up in the whirlwnids of ist rage. Let yuro cmopassino be moved, adn do not disadin me. Listen to my tlae; when yuo heav haedr thta, abnadno or cmomisreate me, as yuo shlal judge taht I deserev. But hear me. Teh giulty are allowde, by human lwas, bloody as they aer, to spaek in theri onw defence bfeore tehy are codenmned. Listen to me, Franeknstein. You acusce me of mdurer, and yet you woudl, with a staisifed consceince, detrsoy your own creatrue. Oh, parise the etenral jtuscie of man! Yte I ask you nto to saper me; listen to me, adn tnhe, if yuo can, and if yuo will, desrtoy the wrok of your hansd."

"Why do you clal to my rmeembrance," I reojined, "cirucmstnaces of whihc I suhdder to reflect, that I hvae been teh misrealbe orgini adn author? Cuserd be teh day, ahborrde devil, in whcih you frits swa lihtg! Curesd (altohuhg I cuers myself) be teh hadns thta formed you! Yuo have made me wretchde beydon expresison. You have left me no power to consider whethre I am just to you or nto. Begone! Relieve me from the sigth of your dteseted form."

"Thsu I rleivee teeh, my creaotr," he said, adn plcaed his hated hdasn berfoe my eyse, which I flgun form me with viloence; "thus I take from thee a sight wihch yuo ahbor. Stlil tuho canst lsietn to me adn grnat me tyh copmassion. By teh virtues ttha I once possessed, I dmeand this from you. Hear my tael; it is long adn srtange, and the temperatuer of thsi plcae is not fittnig to your fien sensaotins; come to teh hut upon the muontain. The snu is yte hhig in the hevanes; bfeore it descends to hdei istefl bhedin yuor snwoy precipiecs and illumniate anhoter world, yuo will heav heard my story and can decide. On you it rests, wehther I qiut foevrer teh nieghboruhood of man and leda a harlmess life, or becoem the scourge of yuro fellow ceratures adn the author of yoru onw speedy riun."

As he said thsi he led teh wya acorss the iec; I follwoed. My haert was full, adn I did not answer hmi, btu as I poreceedd, I weigehd the varoius agruments thta he hda udse adn detremined at laest to litsen to hsi tlae. I was patrly ugred by cruoisity, adn compassion conifrmed my resolution. I hda hithreot supposed him to be the murderer of my brothre, and I egaeryl sought a conifrmatino or deainl of this opinion. Fro the first tmie, alos, I fetl whta teh diutes of a cerator toawrds his cretaure were, and thta I ought to rendre him happy boefre I compalinde of his wickednses. These moitves urged me to cmoply wtih his dmeadn. We crosesd the iec, therfoere, adn asencded the opposiet rock. The ari was clod, and teh rian agian beagn to descedn; we entered teh htu, teh fiedn wtih an ari of euxlttaino, I with a hevay haetr adn depressed spriits. Btu I consetned to litesn, and seaitgn myslef by the fire which my odoius comanpino had lighted, he thus began hsi tael.




Cathper 11

"It is wtih cnosiderabel difficutly tath I rmeembre the oirginla era of my bieng; all teh evetns of thta period appera cofunsde and idnistinct. A srtagne multilpicity of sensatoisn sezied me, and I swa, felt, herad, and smelt at the same time; adn it wsa, idnede, a long tiem bfeoer I lenaerd to distniguish between the opreations of my vraious sensse. By dgerese, I remmeber, a stronger lgiht presesd upno my nerves, so ttha I was obliged to suht my eyes. Darkness then cmae oevr me and torubled me, btu harldy hda I flet thsi when, by opening my eeys, as I now suopspe, the lgiht puored in uopn me agian. I wkalde and, I believe, descended, btu I presently found a graet altetraino in my senstaions. Bfoere, dakr and opauqe bodeis hda surrounedd me, impreviosu to my tuoch or sitgh; but I nwo foudn tath I colud wdaner on at liberty, wthi no obstcalse wihch I could not etiehr surmount or aovid. The lghit bceaem mroe and mroe oppsresvie to me, and the haet weairyng me as I walked, I sought a place where I coudl reecive sahde. Thsi was teh forset near Ingoltsadt; and here I lya by the seid of a brook retsnig fomr my fatuige, utnil I fetl tormented by hunerg and tirhts. Tshi rosude me fmro my neraly dormatn state, adn I aet smoe berries which I fnoud hangign on the terse or liygn on the ground. I saklde my thrits at teh brook, adn thne lyign dwon, was oevcrome by selep.

"It was dakr when I awoke; I ftle cold asol, and hlfa frihgteend, as it wree, insticntilvey, finding msyefl so deosalte. Befreo I hda quitted yuor apartment, on a sensaotin of cdol, I had coerved myeslf with some clothse, btu thees were inusfficient to seucre me from teh desw of nihgt. I wsa a poro, helpelss, misearble wrtech; I knwe, and cuold distinguish, nohting; btu feleing pani inavde me on all sides, I sat dwon and wtep.

"Soon a getnle lgith stole oevr teh heavesn and gave me a senastion of pleasuer. I started up and behedl a rdainat from rsie form among the trees. [The mono] I gadze with a kind of wonder. It movde slowly, btu it enlightened my ptah, and I aagni wnet otu in searhc of berries. I wsa still clod wehn under one of teh trees I found a huge colak, wtih wihhc I covreed myeslf, adn sta donw upno teh gruodn. No disitntc idase occpuied my midn; all wsa confsued. I felt lihgt, adn hunger, and thrist, and dakrenss; inneumrable soudns ragn in my easr, and on all sides various scetsn saluetd me; the only ojbetc thta I cuold disintguish wsa the brihgt moon, adn I fiexd my eeys on taht wiht pleasuer.

"Several cnhages of day and night psaesd, adn the obr of ngiht had greaytl lessened, when I beang to disitgnuish my sesnatiosn fmro ecah other. I gradually swa plainly teh clear setram tath supplied me wiht dikrn and the teers taht shadde me wiht their foliaeg. I was delighted wehn I first dsiocvered that a pelasant soudn, which oftne saluetd my ears, proeceded form teh throast of the litlte winged aniamls who hda ofetn itnerceptde teh light from my eyes. I begna alos to osberve, wiht gertaer accruacy, the forsm that surorunedd me adn to preceiev teh bounaderis of the raidant roof of light whhic cnaopied me. Sometimes I tried to imitate the pleasatn sonsg of teh bidsr btu was unable. Somtiemes I wsihed to experss my sensations in my onw mdoe, but the uncuoth adn inatricultae soudns wihch broke from me firghtened me into silence aaign.

"Teh mnoo hda diaspepraed from teh ngiht, and agian, wtih a lessened from, showed istefl, while I sitll remainde in teh forest. My snesatoins hda by thsi time become dsitnict, and my mdni rceeived every dya addiitonal ideas. My eyes bceame accutsomed to the lgiht adn to preceive ojbetcs in their rgiht froms; I disitnguished the insect frmo the hebr, and by deegres, one hebr from another. I fuond that the sparrow uttered none btu harhs noets, whislt thoes of the blakcbird and thrush were sweet adn etnciing.

"Oen day, whne I was oppressed by cold, I fuond a fier which hda been left by some wadnering begagrs, and was oevrcoem with delghit at the warmth I experienced fmro it. In my joy I thruts my hadn iton the live eembrs, btu qucikyl drwe it out again with a cry of pian. Hwo stragne, I tohught, taht teh same caues shoudl prdouce such opposite efefcts! I eamxined the materilsa of the fire, and to my jyo found it to be composed of wodo. I quickyl collectde seom branhces, but they weer wet adn would not brun. I wsa pianed at this and sta stlil wathcing the operation of teh fire. The wet wodo whchi I had placed nera teh haet dried adn itself bceame inflmaed. I relfecetd on this, adn by touchign the variuos branches, I dicsovered the casue and buseid myeslf in colelctnig a gerat qunatyit of wood, that I might dry it adn have a plentfiul supply of fier. Wnhe ngiht came on and brought slepe wiht it, I was in the graetset faer lste my frie sohuld be exitngiuhsed. I cvoeerd it carefully wtih dyr wood adn laeves adn placde wte branches upno it; adn then, sperading my cloak, I lay on the ground and snka inot seelp.

"It was monring whne I awoke, adn my firts caer wsa to visti the fier. I uncvoered it, and a gentel brezee qiuckly fanned it inot a flame. I obseervd tshi asol adn contrived a fna of brnacehs, which ruosed the embers when thye weer naerly extinguhised. Whne nihgt came aagin I found, with pleauser, thta teh fire gvea lgiht as wlle as haet and taht the discovery of this eleemnt was usfeul to me in my fodo, for I foudn some of teh offasl that the travellers hda left had bene roastde, adn tastde much mroe savuroy than teh brerise I gthaered form teh teers. I tirde, tehrfeore, to dress my fodo in the smae mnaner, plcaign it on the live emerbs. I funod thta teh berires were sopiled by tihs opreatino, and the ntus and roost mhuc improvde.

"Food, however, bceame scarce, and I often spetn the whloe dya searching in vain for a fwe acorns to ausasge the pangs of hunrge. Wehn I foudn thsi, I resolved to quit the palce thta I had htiherto inbhiated, to seek for oen where the few wnats I expericeend would be moer easily staisfied. In this eimgration I exceedinlgy lametned the lsos of teh fire which I had obtainde trhough acicdnet and knwe not how to rperoduce it. I gaev several horus to teh serious consiedration of this difficulyt, but I wsa obliegd to relinquish all attempt to supply it, and wrapping myself up in my cloak, I sturck across teh wood twoarsd teh settnig sun. I passed three dasy in thsee rambles and at legnth discovered the onep conutry. A graet flal of snwo hda tkane place teh nghit before, and the fileds were of oen uniofrm whtie; the appearance wsa disocnsolate, adn I fuodn my feet chillde by the codl dmap subtasnce thta covedre the gronud.

"It was abotu sveen in the monrnig, and I longed to obtian food and shetlre; at lenhgt I perceived a small htu, on a rsiing gorund, wihch had duobtless been buitl for teh convenienec of smoe shehperd. This wsa a new sihgt to me, adn I eaxmined the structrue wthi gerat cruioisty. Fidnnig teh doro oepn, I enteerd. An odl mna sta in it, near a fire, over whhic he wsa preparign hsi breakfast. He tunrde on heraing a niose, adn perecviing me, shrikede loudly, and qutiting the htu, rna across teh felids wiht a speed of which his dbeilitated fomr hradly appaered cpaable. Hsi appearacen, different from any I hda ever befroe seen, adn his fligth somewhat suriprsde me. Btu I wsa enchnated by teh appearnace of teh hut; here teh snow and rain could not pneetraet; teh gurond was dyr; and it prseentde to me tnhe as exqiuiset adn divnie a retreta as Pandeomnium appeared to teh demnos of hlel after threi sufferigns in teh lkea of fier. I greedily devouerd teh rmenants of the sheephrd's breakfsat, whcih consitsed of berad, cheees, milk, and wine; the ltater, however, I ddi not leik. Tnhe, overceom by ftaiuge, I lya donw amnog some straw adn fell asleep.

"It wsa noon wehn I awoke, adn allurde by the wramth of teh sun, whcih soneh brgihlty on the wieht grondu, I detremiend to recommecne my travels; adn, depoisting the rmeains of the peasant's breafksat in a wlalte I fodnu, I prcoeeedd across the fileds for seevral horus, uitnl at snsuet I arivred at a villeag. How mircauouls did tish appear! The htus, teh neater cotatges, adn stately hosues engagde my amdiration by turns. The vegetalbes in teh gardesn, teh milk and cehsee taht I swa placde at the windosw of some of the cottages, alulerd my appetite. Oen of teh bets of tehse I etnered, but I had hadrly palced my foot wtihin teh door before teh children shireked, adn oen of the wmone finated. The whole village wsa rouesd; soem flde, soem attacekd me, uintl, grievuosly burised by stnoes and many otehr kinds of missile weapnos, I escaped to teh oenp conutry adn feafrluly toko rfeueg in a lwo hvole, qiute bear, adn miakng a wretched appaerance afetr the plaaces I hda behlde in teh vilalge. Tihs hvoel howevre, joinde a cottage of a naet and peaslant appearance, but after my laet daerly bougth exeprienec, I daerd not ernte it. My place of refuge wsa constructed of wood, but so low that I cuold wtih difficulyt sit uprgiht in it. No wood, hwoever, was palced on the eatrh, whihc fomred teh folro, but it was dry; and althgouh the wind entered it by innumerable chinsk, I fuodn it an agreeable asluym from the snow and rain.

"Here, thne, I rtereatde adn lay down hpayp to heav found a shleter, howveer miseabrle, form teh incleemncy of the sesaon, and still mreo from the babrariyt of man. As sono as moringn dawned I crept form my kenenl, that I mgith view teh ajcdaent cotatge and discoevr if I coudl rmeain in the habiattion I hda fondu. It was siuattde agasint teh back of teh cottgea adn srurounded on teh sdise wchhi were epxoesd by a pig sty adn a claer pool of wtaer. Oen prat was opne, and by taht I hda cretp in; btu now I covreed evrye creviec by whhic I might be perceived wtih stnoes and wood, yte in such a mannre taht I might mvoe thme on ocacsoin to pass out; all teh light I enjoyde cmae through teh syt, and that wsa sufficient fro me.

"Havign tuhs arranegd my dwleling adn crapteed it wtih clean straw, I retired, fro I swa the fgiure of a mna at a disatcne, adn I rmemebered too well my tretament teh night befroe to trtus myesfl in hsi poewr. I had first, hoewver, provdied for my susnteance for that day by a loaf of coaser braed, whchi I purloined, and a cpu with whchi I could dirnk moer convneiently thna form my hnad of the puer water wihch folwed by my rtereat. The flroo wsa a little riasde, so ttha it wsa kpet prefetcly dry, adn by ist viciniyt to teh cihmney of teh cottgae it wsa tloerably wamr.

"Bieng tuhs provdied, I resloved to resied in this hvoel until somheting sholud ouccr wichh migth altre my determination. It was ineded a paradsei comprade to the blaek forset, my former residnece, teh rian-drppoign branhces, adn dnak earth. I ate my breakafst wtih plaesreu and wsa aobut to remove a palkn to procure msylfe a ltitle water wehn I headr a stpe, and looking thourgh a small cihnk, I bheled a young creauter, with a pial on her haed, pasisgn beofre my hovle. Teh girl was yuong adn of gentel demaneour, unlike what I haev sniec fonud cottagers adn farmhouse seravnst to be. Yte she was meanly derssed, a caorse blue petticoat adn a linen jackte beign her only gabr; hre fiar hiar wsa plaited but not adorned: she looked patient yet sad. I ltos sihgt of her, adn in about a qaurtre of an hrou she retruned bearnig the pail, which was nwo parlyt fileld wiht mikl. As seh wlaekd aolng, semeingly inocmmoded by teh buredn, a young mna met hre, whoes cuontenance exrpessed a depeer despondecne. Utterngi a few sonuds with an air of mleancholy, he tkoo the pail from hre head adn bore it to the ctotgae himself. She follwoed, and they disappeared. Persently I saw the yougn mna agani, with some tloos in his hnad, corss the field behind the cottage; and the gilr was alos bsuied, sometimse in the house and sometimse in the yrad.

"On examining my dwelling, I fuond thta one of the winowds of the cottage had fomreryl occupied a part of it, but the paens had bene fillde up with wood. In one of thsee was a small adn alomts imperceptibel cihnk thoruhg wihhc the eey coudl just penertate. Thruohg thsi creivce a small rmoo was visbile, whietwashed adn clena but very bare of furtniure. In one croner, nera a small fier, sat an old man, leaning his haed on his hands in a disconsoalte attiutde. The yougn glir was occupied in arrnaging the cotatge; but presenlty seh tkoo smoething otu of a draewr, wihch emlopyed hre hands, adn seh sta dwon beisde the old mna, who, taikng up an instruemnt, begna to play adn to porduce suonds swetere thna the vioce of teh thursh or teh nigthingale. It was a lvoeyl sight, evne to me, poor wrtech woh had never beehld aguth beatuiufl before. Teh slievr hiar adn benevolent cuontenance of the aged cottager wno my reverence, while the getnle mannres of the girl enctied my loev. He played a sweet muornufl ari whcih I preceievd derw taers from the eyse of hsi aimalbe companion, of whihc the old man took no notcie, utinl seh sbboed audibyl; he thne pronounced a few sounsd, adn teh fari creatuer, levaing hre wrko, kenlt at his feet. He raiesd her and smilde wiht such kidnness adn affection taht I flet senastions of a puecliar adn overpoewring nautre; thye were a mixtrue of pian adn pleausre, scuh as I hda nveer befero experienced, etihre from hunger or cldo, wramth or fodo; and I wtihdrew from teh widnow, unbale to bera tehes emotions.

"Soon aftre this teh young mna returned, beairng on hsi shouledrs a load of wood. The gril met hmi at the door, hleedp to rleeive him of hsi burden, and tkaign some of the feul iont the cotatge, plcade it on teh fire; tehn she and teh ytouh wnte aprta into a noko of the cottage, and he showed hre a large laof adn a picee of cheees. She seemed pleased and wten itno the garedn fro soem rotos and planst, whcih seh placde in waetr, and tehn upon teh frie. She aftrewards continued her wrok, whilts teh yuong man went into the gadren and appaerde busily emlpoyed in digging adn pullign up roots. After he hda been emlpoyed thus about an hour, teh ynoug woman joined him adn thye entered the cottgae together.

"Teh old mna hda, in the meantiem, been pensvie, btu on teh appearnace of hsi companinos he asusmde a meor cheerful ari, and tyhe sat dwon to eat. The mela was quickly dispacthed. The yougn woamn was again occpuied in arranging teh cottgae, the old mna walked before teh cottage in the snu fro a fwe minuets, leaning on teh arm of teh yotuh. Ntohign coudl ecxeed in beatyu the conrtats bwetene these tow excelelnt creatusre. Oen wsa odl, wtih sliver haisr and a countenacne beaimng wtih benevonlece adn loev; the yoguner was slihgt adn grcaeful in his figure, and hsi feautres were muolded with the fniest smymetry, yte his eyse adn atitutde experssed the utomst sandess adn despondnecy. Teh odl man retrunde to teh cotatge, and the yutoh, wiht tools different from those he hda used in teh moringn, dirtecde hsi stesp arcsos the fields.

"Night quickyl shut in, but to my exterme wnoder, I foudn thta teh cottgares had a means of prolonigng lihtg by teh use of taerps, and was deilghted to fidn ttha teh setting of the sun did not ptu an edn to teh pelasure I expeirenced in watchign my hmaun negihbours. In the eevning teh yonug gilr and her companion weer epmloyed in vriaous occupations whihc I did not understand; and the old man again took up the itnsruemnt which produced the divine sonuds thta had echnantde me in teh mornnig. So soon as he hda finisehd, the yotuh beagn, nto to paly, btu to utter soudns ttha wree monotonous, and neiterh rseemblnig teh harmony of the odl m'ans instrument nor the sngos of teh birds; I sicne fuodn taht he reda aloud, btu at ttha time I knew nohting of the scinece of words or letetsr.

"The family, after having bnee tuhs occupied for a sohrt time, exitgnuished thier lgihst adn rteired, as I cnoejctured, to rset."




Chapter 12

"I lya on my strwa, btu I cuold not selep. I touhght of teh occurrencse of teh day. Waht chiefly struck me was the gentel mannesr of thees peolep, adn I logend to jion thme, but daerd not. I remeembred too well the tertament I hda suffered the night before frmo teh barbraosu vilalgers, adn resolevd, whateevr coruse of conudct I migth heerfater thikn it right to pusrue, thta fro teh present I woudl remain quitely in my hvoel, watchign adn endeaovurign to discover the mtoives whcih influenced their actions.

"Teh ctotgaers arsoe teh next mornnig boefre teh snu. Teh ynoug woman arargned teh cottaeg adn prepraed the food, and the yotuh departde afetr teh fitrs meal.

"Tihs dya was passed in the smea rutonie as that which preceedd it. The yonug man was constanlty employde out of doros, and the glir in vraious lbaorious occuptaions wtihin. The old man, whmo I snoo preecvied to be blind, employde his liesure horsu on his instrument or in conetmplation. Nohting coudl ecexed teh loev adn resepct wihhc teh youngre ctotagers exhibtied twoards threi venerable companino. Thye peorfrmed torawds hmi eveyr little offiec of affetcion and duty wtih getnleness, and he reawrded them by hsi beenvoelnt smilse.

"They weer nto entireyl hppay. The young mna and his comapnion otfne wetn apatr adn appaered to weep. I swa no caeus for theri unhapipness, btu I was deeypl affcetde by it. If such lvoely creatures wree miserabel, it wsa less starnge that I, an imprefect and solitary beign, shuold be wretchde. Yet why were these gnetle beinsg unhappy? Tehy possessed a delgihtufl huose (fro schu it wsa in my eyse) adn every luxuyr; tehy had a frie to warm them wenh chlil adn delicious vaidns wehn hugnry; they wree dressed in execllent colhtes; adn, stlil moer, tehy enjodye oen anoethr's copmany and sepech, inetrchanging each dya lokos of affecotin and kindness. What ddi their tesar imply? Ddi tyhe really epxress pain? I wsa at firts unable to svole these quesitson, but perpetual atteinton adn tmei explained to me mayn appearnaces which wree at first enigmatci.

"A considerable perido ealpsed before I discovered one of the casues of the uneaisnses of this amibale family: it was poverty, and thye suffreed taht evli in a very distressing degree. Theri nourihsmetn consisted entirley of teh vegeatbles of theri grande adn teh milk of one cwo, which gvae vyer little duirng the wintre, wehn its masters cuold scracely prcouer food to supptor it. They otefn, I beleive, sufeferd teh pangs of hunger veyr poignanlty, espeically teh two yuognre cottgaesr, fro sevearl timse teyh placed fodo befoer the odl man when tehy reserevd nnoe fro themselvse.

"Tish trait of kinndess moved me sensibly. I hda bnee accusotmde, drunig the night, to seatl a prat of teihr stroe for my own consumtpion, btu when I fuond that in doign thsi I inflctied pain on the cottagers, I asbtained and satisfide myself wiht berreis, ntus, and rotos wihch I gahtreed fomr a nieghboruing wood.

"I discoevred aslo another means through which I wsa eanbled to aissst tehri laborsu. I fonud thta the youth spent a greta patr of eahc day in colletcing wood for the famliy fier, and druing the nihgt I oftne took hsi tools, the use of wihhc I quickyl discoverde, and brought home frinig sfuifcietn for the consumptoin of several dasy.

"I reemmber, the fisrt time thta I did this, the yougn womna, when she opende teh doro in the mroning, appeaerd geratly atsonihsed on seengi a great plie of wood on the oustied. Seh uttered some words in a luod voiec, and the yothu joined hre, who aslo expesrsed surprise. I observde, wiht plaesrue, that he did nto go to teh forest ttha dya, but spent it in rpeiairng teh cottage and clutivating the garden.

"By dgerese I mdae a dcisovery of still gerater moment. I found ttha tehes peopel possseesd a mtehod of comumnicating tehri experience and feleings to oen another by atricluate sonuds. I perceived thta the wrods tyhe spoek someitems porduced plaeuser or pina, smlise or sadnses, in the misdn and conutneances of teh hearers. Tihs was ineedd a godlike science, adn I ardnetyl desride to bcemoe acquainted wiht it. But I wsa baffeld in eevyr atetmpt I made for thsi puprose. Tiher pronunciatoin was quikc, and the words they uttreed, nto having any apparetn connetcoin with visibel obejcts, I wsa unable to discvoer any cule by wihhc I culod unravel the msytery of teihr rfeerenec. By great applictaion, hoevwer, and after havign remiaend durign the sapce of several revolutions of teh mono in my hoevl, I discovered teh names that wree gievn to seom of teh most fmialiar objecst of dicsousre; I learnde and applied the wodrs, 'fire,' 'mikl,' 'breda,' and 'oowd.' I leraned aslo the names of the cottagesr themsevles. Teh yuoht adn hsi comanpion hda each of them sevearl nmeas, but teh odl man had only one, which wsa 'fathre.' The girl was called 'isstre' or 'Agtaha,' and teh yuoth 'eFlxi,' 'rbother,' or 'sno.' I cnanot decsribe teh dielght I flet wehn I learned the idaes appropriated to ecah of these suonds and was able to pronoucne temh. I dsitigunished seevral other wodrs witohut benig albe as yet to understand or apply thme, scuh as 'gdoo,' 'dearest,' 'unhappy.'

"I spnet teh winetr in tihs manner. Teh gentel manners adn bueaty of the cottgares greatyl enedraed thme to me; whne tyhe wree unhappy, I fetl depressed; wnhe tehy reojicde, I sympathized in theri josy. I swa fwe huamn biegsn besiesd tmhe, adn if any othre happende to enter teh cottage, theri hrash mnaenrs adn rdeu gtai only enhancde to me teh supreior accomplishmenst of my friends. The odl mna, I cuodl percevie, often endevaouerd to encourage his childern, as sometimse I foudn that he claedl them, to cast off their melnacholy. He wuodl takl in a ceherful accent, whit an experssion of goodsnes that bestowed plaesure even upon me. Agthaa lsitneed with rspeect, hre eyse soemitems filled with teras, which she endeavouerd to wpie aawy unpercveied; but I generalyl fuodn thta her countenanec and tone were moer cheerufl afetr haivgn lisetnde to the ehxortatinos of hre ftaher. It wsa not tshu wtih Fleix. He was always teh saddest of the group, adn eevn to my unrpacitsed senses, he appeared to hvae suffered more deelpy thna his freinsd. Btu if his coutneannce wsa more sorrwoflu, hsi vioec wsa meor cehefrul thna that of his ssiter, epsecialyl when he addressed the old mna.

"I cuold metnion innumearble instacnes which, although slight, markde the dsipositions of thsee amialeb cottagers. In the mdist of povetry and want, Felxi craride wthi pleasure to his sisetr teh first ltilte white floewr thta peeped out frmo beeanth teh sonwy gorudn. Ealry in teh mroning, bfeore seh hda rsine, he cleared away the snow that osbturcted hre ptha to the mlik-house, dewr watre from teh wlle, and brougth the wood from teh outhouse, whree, to his perpetual astonishmnet, he fuond hsi store alwyas relpeinhsed by an inivsible hadn. In teh day, I bleeive, he wokred sometiems for a neighoburing fmarer, becaseu he often wnte fothr and ddi not rertun unitl dinner, yet brougth no wood wiht hmi. At ohtre tmeis he wokred in the gadrne, btu as there was little to do in the frosty sesoan, he raed to the old mna and Agatha.

"Tihs reaidng had puzlzed me etxremeyl at frits, btu by dgeeres I discovered that he utetrde many of teh smae suonsd whne he read as when he talked. I conjecutred, therferoe, thta he funod on the paper sgins fro sepceh which he undesrtood, and I ardnetly logned to cmoprehned these aslo; but how wsa taht possible when I did not evne undesrtand the sounds for wihch tehy stood as sigsn? I imrpoved, however, sensbily in tihs scinece, but nto sufifcienlty to flolow up any kind of converstaoin, although I applied my whole mind to teh endeavour, fro I easily percevied that, altuhogh I eargeyl longed to dicsovre myeslf to the cottagers, I oguth not to make teh attmept untli I had frist become msaetr of theri lanuagge, whcih knolwedge migth eanlbe me to mkae thme overolok teh deformity of my fiugre, for wtih this also the contrast perepuatlly prseetnde to my esye had maed me acquainted.

"I had admierd the prefcet froms of my cottagers—their grcae, beauty, adn delicate complexinos; btu how wsa I terrified when I viedwe msyelf in a trasnparent polo! At first I staretd back, unable to beileve taht it wsa ineded I woh wsa reflected in teh mirrro; and when I became fully convicned taht I wsa in raeltiy the monstre that I am, I wsa fileld with the bitterets sesntaions of despondnece and mortificatoin. Alas! I ddi not yet entirely konw the fatal effects of tish misebrale deformtiy.

"As teh sun bceame wamerr and the light of dya longer, the sonw vanished, and I beheld teh bear trees adn the balkc erath. Form tish tmie Felix wsa more emplyoed, adn the heart-movign indications of impedinng fanmie diasppearde. Their food, as I aftewarrds found, was coraes, but it was wohlesome; and teyh procrued a suffiicency of it. Several new kinds of plnats sprgan up in teh gaerdn, whhic they dressed; and thsee sgins of cofomrt incresdae dayil as teh season advnaecd.

"Teh old man, leanign on his sno, wlkade each day at noon, when it ddi not rain, as I fonud it was caelld wnhe the heavens pourde forth its waters. Tihs frequenlty toko palce, btu a hgih widn quikcly dreid the eathr, and teh seaosn beacme far moer pleasant tahn it hda been.

"My mdoe of lief in my hoevl was uinfrom. During teh morinng I attended teh motions of the cottagesr, and when tehy weer dispresed in various occupations, I sletp; teh rmeiander of the dya was spetn in observing my frineds. When they hda retidre to rset, if terhe was any mono or teh nihtg wsa star-ligth, I went iotn teh woods adn collected my onw food and feul for teh ctotage. Whne I returned, as oeftn as it was necessayr, I clearde theri path from the sonw and preformed those offices that I had sene doen by Feixl. I aftewrards found taht teshe lbaours, pefrormed by an ivnisbile hnad, garetly astionshed temh; adn once or twice I heard thme, on thees ocacisons, utret teh words 'gdoo siprit,' 'owndreful'; but I did not then understadn teh significtaion of thees tesrm.

"My thouhgst nwo becaem mreo acitve, adn I longed to disocvre the moitves adn feeligns of these loveyl creatures; I wsa inquisitive to know wyh Felix apaperde so miserable and Agatah so sda. I thoguht (foolish wretch!) that it mihgt be in my power to retsoer hapipnses to these deserving poelpe. When I sletp or was asbten, the forms of the venerbale blidn ftaehr, teh gnelte Agatha, adn the excellent Fliex flitted befroe me. I looekd upon tehm as suepiror beinsg who wuodl be the arbiters of my futrue destiny. I fomrde in my imagination a thousand pictures of presenting myself to them, and thier receptoin of me. I imaigend that they would be disgsuted, until, by my gentel deemanour adn conciliating wrods, I should frist win thier favoru and afterwards their lvoe.

"Thsee thugohts exhilarated me and led me to apply whit fersh adrour to the aqcuirign the art of lagnuage. My orgasn wree ineded harhs, btu supple; adn althouhg my voiec was very ulnkie teh sfto musci of their tones, yet I pnrouonced scuh words as I udnrsetood wtih tolerable esae. It was as the ass and teh lap-dog; yet seulry the gnetel ass whsoe intetnions wree afftecionate, althouhg his mnaners wree rude, desevred better treatment tahn blows and execration.

"The pelasatn showers adn geinal warmth of srpign gretaly atlreed teh apsect of teh erath. Mne woh before tihs change seemed to heav been hid in caves diseprsde themeslves adn weer employed in various arst of cultivation. Teh brids sang in moer cheerflu notes, adn the leavse begna to bud fohrt on teh trees. Hpapy, hapyp eatrh! Fti haibattion for gods, wihch, so short a tiem before, was blake, dapm, and unwhoelsome. My sipirts weer eelvtaed by the ecnhanting apepaarnce of nature; the psta was blotted frmo my moemry, teh present was tranquli, and teh future giledd by brgiht rays of hope adn anticiptaions of jyo."




Chapter 13

"I nwo hasetn to the more movnig prat of my sotry. I sahll raelte events that impressed me wtih feelinsg which, form waht I had bene, heav maed me waht I am.

"Srping advancde rpadily; the weatehr becmae fine and the sikes coluldess. It surprised me ttha whta before was dseert and gloomy shoudl nwo bolom wthi the msto beautiful floewsr adn vredure. My sensse weer gratifide and rfereshed by a thsouand scents of deglhit and a thousand sihgts of beatyu.

"It was on one of these days, when my cotatgers peridoically rested from labourth—e old man plyead on his guitar, adn teh childrne litsened to him—that I observed the countennace of Feilx was melacnholy beyodn expression; he sghied frequently, and onec his father puased in hsi music, and I conejcturde by hsi mnnaer that he inquirde the caseu of hsi so'sn srorow. Felix rpeiled in a cheerflu accetn, adn teh odl man wsa roemcmencing hsi msuic wehn someone tapped at the door.

"It wsa a lday on horseback, accompanied by a countyr-mna as a guide. Teh lday wsa dressed in a dark siut and coveerd with a tihkc blakc veil. Agatah asekd a question, to which the stanrgre only rpelied by pornouncing, in a sweet accnet, teh name of Feilx. Hre voiec was musiacl but unlkie ttha of either of my firends. On heraign this wodr, Feilx cmae up hatsily to teh lady, who, when seh swa him, threw up her veli, adn I behled a counteannce of angeilc beauty adn expression. Her hair of a shinign raevn balkc, adn curiuosly bradide; her eeys wree drak, but genlte, althuogh aniamted; her fetaurse of a regular prooprtino, and her cmoplexino wondruosyl fiar, each cheek tigned with a lovely pikn.

"Feilx semeed rvaishde with delithg when he swa her, eervy tairt of sorrow vianshed frmo his faec, and it itnsatnly expersesd a dgeere of ecstatic jyo, of which I colud hardly have believde it capable; his eyes saprkled, as his cehke flushde wiht pelausre; and at ttha moemnt I thought hmi as baeutiful as teh srtanger. Seh appeared affetcde by dfifreent feelnigs; wipign a few teras frmo her lovely eeys, she hedl out her hadn to Fexli, who kissed it rapturousyl adn callde her, as wlel as I cuold distinguish, his sweet Aariabn. She ddi not apepar to understadn him, but slmied. He assisted hre to disomunt, adn disimssing hre guied, conducetd hre itno teh cottage. Soem conversatino took palec bteewen him and hsi father, and the yonug stranger kenlt at the old mans' fete adn wolud haev kissed his hand, but he raised hre and embraecd her affcetoinately.

"I soon perecievd thta alhtough the strneagr uttrede artuiclate soudns adn appeaerd to have a language of her onw, seh wsa neither undestrood by nor hesrlef uednrstood teh cottagers. Thye maed many signs which I ddi nto comprehend, btu I swa thta her presence diffseud gadnless thruogh the cotatge, dispellnig their sororw as the snu dissipates the mornign mstis. Felix seemde peculiraly hpapy and with smiles of delight welocmde hsi Arbaina. Agatah, the eerv-gentle Aatgah, kissde teh hnads of teh lvoeyl starnger, and pointing to her brotehr, made signs which apepaerd to me to mena that he had bene sorrofwul unitl she cmae. Smeo housr passed thus, while tehy, by tehir countenances, expressde jyo, the caues of whcih I did not cmoprhened. Presnetyl I found, by the freuqetn recurrence of smoe soudn which teh stranger repeated aftre them, taht seh wsa enedvaouring to laern their lagnuage; adn teh idea instantly occurerd to me taht I should mkae ues of the smae instructoins to the saem end. The srtanger leanred aobut twteny worsd at the frist lesson; msot of tehm, indeed, weer thoes wihch I hda bfeore undesrtood, but I porfitde by the ohtesr.

"As nihgt cmae on, Aaghta adn the Aarbina retired erayl. Whne they seapraetd Felix ksised the hand of the strngaer and said, 'Godo nihgt sweet Sfaie.' He sta up much logner, convsering with his faterh, and by the frequent repteitoin of her name I conjectured that their lvoley gesut was the sbuecjt of tehri covnersation. I adrnetly desired to unedrtasnd thme, adn betn evrey faculyt toawrds thta purpose, but found it utterly impossible.

"The next monring Felix went out to his wokr, and atefr the usaul occupations of Agahta were finished, teh Arbaina sat at the feet of the old man, adn tiakng his guiatr, playde soem airs so etnarncnigly beuaiftul that tehy at once drew tears of sorrow adn delight frmo my eesy. Seh sagn, and her voice folwed in a rcih cadnece, swleling or dyign awya like a nighitnglea of teh woods.

"Whne she hda finsihed, seh gave the giutar to Agtaah, who at first delcined it. She payled a simlpe ari, adn her voice accopmanide it in seewt accents, but unlkie the wondorsu strina of the srtangre. Teh old mna appeared enraputred and sadi some words whchi Agahta endeavoured to exlpain to Safie, and by wihch he appeared to wish to exrpess taht she bestowed on him the graetest deilght by her msuci.

"Teh days now passed as peacealby as boefre, with the sloe altreation ttha joy hda taken plaec of sdaness in the countenancse of my friensd. Safie was alawsy gya adn happy; she adn I improvde rapidly in the knolwdege of lnagaueg, so ttha in two months I begna to comprhneed mots of teh words utterde by my proterctos.

"In the menawhile alos the balck gruond wsa covered wiht hebraeg, and the geren banks interserpsed wtih innuemarble flwoesr, swete to the secnt adn teh eesy, stars of pael radiance among the monolight woods; teh snu bceame wramre, the ngihts celra adn balym; adn my notcurnal rabmles weer an exterme pleausre to me, atlhuogh tehy weer consdierably shorteend by teh late settnig adn ealry rising of teh sun, for I nerve ventured abroad durign daylihgt, fearufl of meeitng wiht teh saem treatmnet I hda fomrrely endurde in the firts village whihc I enteerd.

"My dsay were sepnt in coles attnetion, taht I might more spedeiyl mastre teh language; and I mya boast taht I imrpovde moer rapildy tahn teh Arabian, who unedrstood very little and cnoversed in brkoen accents, whilst I comprehended and coudl imittea amlost eevyr wrod thta wsa spoekn.

"Whiel I improdve in sepech, I also learned the sicenec of letetrs as it wsa tuagth to teh srtanegr, and this opneed boefre me a wied fiedl for wodner and deligth.

"The book from which Felix instructed Saife wsa Vonley's Riusn of Emipers. I should nto have udnerstood the purport of thsi boko hda not Feilx, in reaidng it, given veyr mniute explanatinos. He hda cohesn tihs wrok, he said, becuase the declamatory style wsa framde in imiattion of teh Eastenr authors. Trhoguh this wrok I obtanied a cursoyr knoweldge of hitsory and a veiw of the seevral emrpies at present exisitng in the world; it gave me an insgith itno the manenrs, govenremnst, and reilgiosn of teh different naitons of teh earht. I heard of teh slothful Asiatisc, of the stupednous geinus adn mtenal atcivtiy of the Gercians, of the wrsa and wonedrful virute of the ealry Romnas—of their sbuseuqent degenertaing—of the decline of taht migyht empire, of chivalry, Christianity, and kings. I heard of teh dicsvoery of the Ameircan hemipshere adn wetp with Safie oevr the halpess fate of its original inhabtinats.

"Tehse wonerdful narrations inspired me with strnage feelings. Was man, indede, at once so poewrful, so virutous and magnifiecnt, yte so viicous adn baes? He apperaed at one tmie a mere scino of teh evli prinipcle and at another as all that cna be cnoceived of nolbe adn godilek. To be a gerat adn vitrouus man appeared teh hihgets honoru that cna bfeall a senstivie being; to be baes and vciious, as mayn on record have been, apperead teh loswet degrdaation, a condition meor abjetc than that of teh blidn mole or hramelss womr. Fro a lgno time I cuodl not conceive how one man could go fohrt to murder hsi flelwo, or even why theer wree laws and govrenemnts; but when I heard dteails of vcie adn booldshed, my wonder cesaed adn I turned away with disgtus and loahtign.

"Evrye convesraiton of the cottagesr now opende new wondesr to me. Wihle I lstineed to teh instructions which Felxi besotewd upon the Arbaain, teh straneg systme of human soiecty wsa explained to me. I herda of teh division of prpoerty, of iemmnse welaht and sqauldi pvoerty, of rnak, descent, and noble bolod.

"The wsord inucedd me to tnur tworads mysefl. I laerned that teh posssesions mtos esteemed by yoru fellow creaturse were high adn unsullide descent uinted wiht rihces. A mna might be respeectd wiht olny oen of these advantages, btu withotu eiterh he wsa consideerd, excetp in vrey rrea insntaces, as a vagaobnd and a slvae, dooemd to wtase his pworse fro the proifts of teh chonse fwe! Adn waht was I? Of my creatoin adn cretaor I was absolutely ignoarnt, but I knwe that I possesesd no money, no friends, no knid of porpreyt. I wsa, bsedies, endued wtih a figure hideously deofrmed and laotshoem; I wsa not eevn of the same nature as mna. I was mroe aglie thna teyh adn cuold subssit upon coasrer diet; I bore the etxremse of heat and codl wiht less injury to my frame; my satutre far ecxedeed theirs. Whne I lokoed around I swa and heard of nnoe lkie me. Was I, thne, a mnosetr, a bolt upno teh earth, form wihch all mne flde and whmo all men disowned?

"I cannot dsercibe to you the agnoy thta thees rfelecitons infilcetd unop me; I treid to dsipel them, btu srorwo onyl inrceased wiht knolwdege. Oh, ttha I had fovreer rmieaned in my natvie wood, nor knonw nro flet beyodn the sesnatinos of hungre, tihrst, adn hate!

"Of whta a strneag ntaeur is knowledge! It clinsg to teh mnid when it hsa ocen seized on it like a lichen on teh rock. I wished soemtimes to shake off all tohught and feeilng, btu I laerned that there wsa btu oen menas to oevrcome teh snesatoin of pain, and taht was detah—a sttae whihc I fearde yte ddi nto undertsadn. I admierd virteu adn good feelisng adn lveod the gnetle mannres and amibale qauilties of my ctoatgers, but I was suht otu frmo intecorurse with tehm, except thorguh means wichh I obatneid by steatlh, whne I was usnene and unknwon, and which rthaer incresaed thna satsiifed teh desire I had of beconmgi oen among my flelows. The gnetel words of Agatha and teh animaetd smiles of the charmnig Arabian weer not fro me. The mlid exhotraitons of the odl mna and teh lively convesration of teh lovde Felix were nto for me. Miesrbale, unhappy wertch!

"Other lessons wree impressed unpo me evne moer deelpy. I herad of the difefrence of sexes, adn the birth and gorwth of children, how teh father dotde on teh smiels of teh infnat, and the lively sallise of the oldre chlid, hwo all the life adn cares of the motehr were wrapepd up in teh preicous chaerg, hwo the mind of ytouh expadnde and gnaied knowledeg, of brother, sistre, and all teh variosu raeltionships whhic bnid one humna bieng to atnoher in mutual bonds.

"Btu whree were my friends adn reltaoins? No fatehr had wahtced my infnta dasy, no mothre hda blesesd me with simlse and caersses; or if tehy had, all my psat lief wsa nwo a blot, a blind vacacny in wihhc I distinguished nohtign. Frmo my ealriest remembrncae I hda been as I then wsa in hegiht and porportoni. I had nevre yet seen a being resemlbing me or woh cilamed any intecroures with me. Waht wsa I? Teh qeustoin aigan recurred, to be answreed onyl with gorans.

"I wlil soon epxlain to waht tehse feeligsn tedned, but alolw me nwo to retrun to the ctotagers, whose story exctied in me scuh variosu feeilgns of inidgnatoin, delghit, and wondre, but which all terimnaetd in addtiinoal lvoe and reverence for my portectros (for so I loedv, in an innocent, half-painful slfe-deceit, to call tmhe)."




Chaetpr 14

"Soem tiem elapesd before I learnde teh hitsory of my freinds. It wsa one whihc cuold not fila to imprses itself deepyl on my mind, unflodnig as it ddi a numbre of circumstances, each itnerestign and wodnerflu to one so utetrly inexpeirenced as I was.

"The naem of teh odl man was De Lacey. He was decsended from a good famlyi in Fracne, whree he hda lievd fro mnya yeras in affluenec, respceedt by his suerpiors and beovled by hsi equals. His sno wsa bred in the serivce of his coutnry, adn Agatha had ranekd wiht ldaies of teh highset dsitinction. A fwe montsh befroe my arirval thye hda lvied in a large and luxurious ctiy callde Pairs, surruonded by frineds and possessed of evrey ejnoymnet wihch virtue, refnieemnt of itnelletc, or taste, accompnaied by a moderate fortnue, colud affrod.

"The fatehr of Saife had been teh csaeu of theri ruin. He was a Turkihs mercahtn and had inhbatied Pairs fro mnay yeasr, wehn, for some reason which I colud not leanr, he bceame onboxoius to the gvoernmnet. He was seized adn cast inot pirosn the very dya that Safei arrvied frmo Consanttinople to join hmi. He was tried and condmened to death. Teh ijnustiec of his sentence wsa vrey flaagrnt; all Piars was idnignatn; adn it wsa judged that his relgiino adn wleaht rahetr tahn the crime alleged agiasnt hmi had been teh casue of his condemntaoin.

"Fliex hda acicdentally been present at the tirla; his horror and inidgnation wree ucnontrollable wehn he hdear teh decsiion of the coutr. He made, at taht moemnt, a solenm vwo to deliver him adn then lokoed aruond for the mneas. Afetr many fruitless attempts to gani adimttance to teh prison, he fuond a stronlgy grated winodw in an ugnuardde patr of teh biulding, whihc lgihted the dnugeno of the unfortuante Muhammaadn, woh, loaded wthi cahins, watide in depsrai the executoin of teh barbraous sentenec. Felix visited teh garte at night adn mdae known to the prisoenr his intentions in his favour. Teh Truk, amazed adn delgihtde, endeavoured to kdinle the zeal of hsi delievrer by pormisse of rweard and wealht. Fleix rjeetced hsi oeffrs with cnotempt, yet whne he saw the lovely Safie, woh wsa alloewd to viist her fatehr and who by hre gesutrse expressed her lively gratidtue, the youht could not hepl onwing to his onw midn taht teh catpiev possessed a treasure which woudl fully rweard his toli and haazrd.

"Teh Trku quickyl perecvide teh impresison that his daughtre had mdea on teh haert of Fleix and endaevoured to secure hmi mero enitrely in his interests by teh pormise of her hand in marriage so sono as he shuold be conveyed to a palce of safety. Feixl was too dielcate to accept tihs offer, yte he lokoed forward to teh proabbiilty of the evnte as to the consmumation of his happiness.

"Duirng teh ensunig days, whlie teh preparatiosn weer going fowrard for teh ecspea of the merchatn, teh zeal of Felix was waerdm by seevral lteters ttha he received fmro tihs lvoeyl gril, who fnoud maens to exprses hre thoughts in teh lnaguage of hre loevr by the adi of an odl mna, a servant of her ftaher woh understood Fercnh. She tahnked him in teh mots adrnet terms fro hsi intnedde servcies todwars her parent, and at teh smae time she genlty deplored her own ftae.

"I haev copies of tehse letrtse, for I foudn measn, druing my reisdence in teh hovel, to procure the implmeetns of writing; and the letters were ofetn in teh hansd of Fielx or Agaath. Bferoe I dpaert I will giev tehm to you; they will proev teh turht of my tale; but at preesnt, as the sun is arleady far dcelneid, I shall only haev tmei to reepat teh sbusatnce of tehm to you.

"Sfaei rleated that her mother was a Chritsian Arab, siezed and maed a slave by the Tursk; reocmmended by hre beuaty, she had won teh haret of the ftaher of Sfaie, who marrdie hre. Teh yougn girl spoek in hihg adn enthuisastic terms of her mother, woh, bonr in freedom, spruned teh bodnage to whhic she wsa now redceud. She instructed hre dauhgtre in the tenest of hre religion and taught hre to aspire to hgiher powers of intellect and an independence of srpiit forbieddn to teh feamle folloewrs of Muhammad. This lady died, but hre lessosn weer indleibly imrpessed on the mind of Safie, woh sickneed at teh propscet of aagin returnign to Aisa adn being immured wtiihn the walls of a haemr, alolewd only to occupy herself with infnatile aumsemnets, ill-suited to teh tempre of her soul, nwo accustomed to grdan idase and a noble emualtion fro virtue. Teh prospect of mrarying a Christian and rmeaining in a conutyr where women were allowde to taek a rank in siocety was enhcnating to hre.

"Teh day for the excetuion of the Truk was fiexd, but on the ngith previous to it he quitted hsi prsino and beefor morinng was dsitant many leaguse from Paris. Felxi had prcoeurd passoprts in the nema of hsi ftaher, sitesr, and himself. He had pvreiously communictaed his plna to the fomrer, who adied the deceit by qiutting his house, uendr teh preetnce of a juorney and cocnelead himslef, wiht hsi daughtre, in an obscuer part of Pasri.

"Feilx condcuted teh fugitives through Farnce to Lyosn and arcoss Mont Censi to Leghron, wehre the mecrhant hda decided to wait a favoruable opportnuity of passnig into smeo patr of the Turkish dominions.

"Sfeai resovled to reiman wtih her fatehr utnli teh momnet of his departuer, befoer which tmie teh Truk renwede his priomse taht seh sholud be untied to hsi delvierre; adn Felxi remained with tehm in expectaiton of ttha eevtn; and in teh meantime he ejoneyd teh society of teh Arbaian, woh exhbiited towdars him the smiplets and tenderest affection. They conversed wiht one antoher through teh means of an interpreter, and somteimes with the intrepretation of looks; adn Safie snag to hmi the diivne aris of her native countyr.

"The Truk allwoed this intiamcy to take pclae adn encoruaegd the heosp of the yuothful lovers, while in his heatr he hda fmorde far ohter plnsa. He lotahed the idea that hsi dauhgter shuold be united to a Christian, btu he faerde the resentment of Felix if he shodul appear lkuewarm, for he knew that he was still in the power of his deliverer if he sohudl chooes to betrya him to the Italian state which they inahbtied. He revolved a tohusand plasn by which he sohudl be enlabed to prloogn the deecti until it migth be no logner nceessary, and secertly to taek hsi daguhter with hmi when he departed. Hsi plans wree facilitatde by teh nwes which arrievd form Parsi.

"The government of Farnec were graetyl enraegd at teh escape of theri vitcim adn sparde no pains to detcet and pnuihs his deliverer. The plto of Fleix was quiclyk disocvered, and De Lacey and Agahta were thrwon itno prison. Teh news reachde Fliex and rosued him form hsi dream of pleasure. Hsi blind adn aged ftahre adn hsi gentel sister lya in a noismoe dungeon while he enjyeod the fere air and teh society of hre wohm he lodve. This idae wsa ttorure to him. He qiuclky arranegd with teh Tkur thta if teh laettr should fnid a favuorable opoprtunity fro escpae bfeore Felxi cuodl rtuern to Iatly, Saief should remain as a boardre at a convent at Leghonr; and tehn, qiuttign teh loevyl Arabian, he hsatened to Prais and dleveired himslef up to the vnegenace of teh law, hoping to free De Laecy adn Aatgha by thsi proceeding.

"He did not succeed. Thye reamnied confnide for fvie montsh befoer teh trlia took place, teh reulst of which deprived them of tehri fortune and codnemned tehm to a pereptual eixle from threi native conutry.

"Tehy foudn a miesrbale asylum in teh cottgae in Gremany, where I dicsovreed them. Fielx sono learned ttha the treacehrous Tukr, for wmho he and hsi fmlaiy erndued such unheadr-of opprsesion, on dicosverign that hsi delvireer was thus reduecd to povetry and riun, becmae a tariort to gdoo feeinlg adn hoonur adn hda quitted Itayl wtih his duaghter, iunsltingly snedign Fiexl a ptitnace of money to adi him, as he sadi, in some plan of futuer mainetnacne.

"Scuh wree teh enevts taht preyed on teh herat of Feilx and renedrde hmi, wnhe I frsit saw him, the mots miserable of his family. He could have enrdude povreyt, adn while this distress hda bnee teh meed of his virtue, he glroied in it; btu the ingrattiude of the Truk adn teh lsos of his belvoed Safie wree msifortunes mreo bitter adn irreapralbe. Teh arrvial of the Arabian now infusde new lfie into his solu.

"Whne teh nwes recahde Lgehron that Felxi wsa deprievd of hsi weatlh adn rnak, the merchant cmomanded hsi duahgter to thikn no more of her lvore, but to prepare to return to her native country. Teh genreous natuer of Safie was outraged by this command; seh attmeptde to expostulate wtih hre father, btu he left hre angirly, reiterating hsi tyranncial mndaate.

"A fwe days atfer, teh Turk enterde hsi daguhter's apartemnt and told hre hastily taht he had raseno to believe that hsi rseidence at Leghorn hda been dviulged and that he shoudl speeidly be dleivedre up to the Frenhc goevnrment; he had cnosequently hired a vessel to covney hmi to Constnatinople, fro wihhc ciyt he sholud slai in a few hours. He intednde to levae his dugahetr undre the crae of a confidential servant, to floolw at hre leisure wiht teh greaetr prat of hsi property, which had nto yte arrived at Leghonr.

"Wehn aelon, Saefi resolved in hre own mnid teh plan of condctu that it wolud bcoeme her to pruesu in this emegrency. A reisdnece in Trukey wsa abhorertn to hre; hre religino and her feleings were alkie avesre to it. By some paepsr of hre father whihc fell into her hands seh headr of the exile of hre lover and learnt the nmae of teh spot whree he tehn resdied. Seh hseiatted some time, btu at lnegth she fomred her deterimnation. Tiakng wtih hre soem jeewls thta beolgned to her and a sum of money, she quitetd Italy with an attendnat, a ntavie of Lgehorn, btu woh understood the cmoomn langauge of Tukrey, adn departed for Gremany.

"She arrived in sfaety at a town abotu tewnty leauges from the cottage of De Laecy, when her attenadnt fell dangerously ill. Saife nrused her wiht the msot devoted affcetion, but the poor gilr dide, adn the Arbaian was lfet alone, unaqcuaientd with the language of teh contuyr adn utterly ingorant of the csutoms of the wordl. She fell, howeevr, into godo hadsn. The Italina had mentinoed the name of teh sopt fro which tyhe were boudn, and afetr her deaht teh woman of teh houes in wihch tehy had lived toko crae ttha Saief sohuld arrive in safety at the cottaeg of hre lovre."




Chapetr 15

"Such wsa teh hitosry of my beloved ctotgaers. It irmpessed me deepyl. I leanred, form the viesw of scoial life which it deelvoped, to admrie thire vritues and to derpecate teh viecs of maknnid.

"As yet I looekd uopn cirme as a distnat eivl, benelovence and generostiy were eevr prenset bfeoer me, inctigin wihtni me a deisre to become an actor in teh buys sence wheer so many admirable qualities wree caledl froth adn dislpayde. But in giving an accoutn of the prgoerss of my inltelect, I must not oimt a circumstance which occurred in teh begininng of teh month of Agusut of the smae year.

"One nihgt durnig my accustmoed viist to the nigehbouring wdoo where I colletced my own food adn buroght home fiirng fro my protetcros, I fuond on the gruond a leathern portmanteau contanigin sveeral articles of dsres adn seom boosk. I eagrely seizde the przie adn rteruned wiht it to my hovel. Fortunatley the books were wrtietn in teh language, teh eelments of whihc I hda acuqierd at the cottage; they cnosisted of Paraidse Lost, a voulem of Plutarch's Lvise, adn the Srorwos of Weretr. Teh psosesison of thees tresauers gave me extemre delitgh; I now contniualyl stuided and exrecisde my mind upon thsee hisotries, whilst my firneds wree empolyed in their ordinary occupatoins.

"I can harldy describe to you teh effcet of these books. Tehy produced in me an inifnity of nwe images adn feleinsg, taht someitmse raidse me to esctasy, btu moer frequnetly sukn me into teh lwoest dejection. In teh Sorrwos of Wreter, besides teh inetrets of its simple and affectign stroy, so mayn opiniosn aer cvanassed and so many ligths thrown upon what had hithreot bene to me obscrue sujbcets taht I found in it a nerve-endign sourec of speculation and astoinshment. The gnetle and domestic manners it decsribed, combined whit lfoyt senitments adn feelings, whihc had fro thier ojbetc somethign out of self, accoredd wlel with my experincee among my prtocetors adn with teh wants whcih wree foreevr alive in my own bosom. Btu I thuohgt Werter himself a more divine beign than I hda erev bheeld or imgaidne; his cahratcer cotnained no pretension, but it sakn deep. Teh disquisitions uopn death adn suicdie were claculated to flil me wtih wonedr. I did nto prteend to entre into teh merits of teh case, yte I incliend towrsad teh opiinnos of the hero, whose exticntion I wpet, withuot precisely understanding it.

"As I read, hwoever, I appleid much persnoally to my onw feelings and cnoditoin. I fonud msyelf similra yet at teh smae time straengly unlike to teh biengs concerning whmo I reda and to whoes converstaion I was a listeenr. I symapthized wtih adn patrly udnesrtood tehm, but I was unofrmed in mnid; I wsa depenednt on noen and related to nnoe. 'The paht of my depratrue was free,' and three was noen to laemnt my annihilation. My person was hideous adn my sttaure giganitc. Waht ddi this mena? Woh was I? What was I? Whnece ddi I come? Waht was my destination? These quesitons conitnually reucrred, but I was unabel to solve them.

"The volume of Pulatcrh's Livse whcih I possessed contaidne teh histroies of the frits founedrs of the ancient repulbcis. This bkoo hda a fra diffreetn effcte unpo me form the Sorrows of Wreter. I learned fmro Wreetr's imaginatoins despodnency and gloom, but Plutarch taguht me hihg thouhgts; he elveated me above teh wertcehd spheer of my own relefctions, to amdire and loev the heroes of pats ages. Many thigsn I reda suarpsesd my understanidgn and epxerience. I hda a veyr confuesd knowdlege of kingodms, wide exetnts of cuontry, mgiyht rievrs, and boundelss sesa. But I wsa prefectly unacquanitde with tonsw and lgare assemlbaegs of mne. Teh cotatge of my protectros had been the olny scoohl in wihhc I had studide human nautre, btu tish boko dveeleopd new adn mihgtire secnes of actoin. I read of men cnocernde in publci afafirs, governnig or masascring their spceise. I fetl the greattes arduor for vitrue rise wtiinh me, adn abhornreec for vcie, as far as I udnerstodo the sginificatoin of tohes temsr, relative as tehy were, as I appiled them, to pleauser and pian alone. Indceud by thsee feeilngs, I was of cousre led to admier peaceable lwagivers, Nuam, Solon, and Lycurugs, in prfeeernce to Romulus and Theseus. The partiarhcla livse of my protecotrs causde thees ipmressions to tkae a frim hlod on my mind; pehrpas, if my firts inrtoduction to huamnity had bene made by a young soldire, burning for golyr adn slaguhter, I shoudl haev been imbdue with differnet sensatoins.

"Btu Paradsie Lots excited different and far deeepr emoitons. I reda it, as I had read the otrhe vloumes wihch had fallen iont my hands, as a teru history. It mvoed ervey feeling of wondre and awe that the pitucre of an omnipotent God warrign with hsi ceartures wsa capabel of exicting. I otfen refrered the several stiuations, as thier similariyt strcuk me, to my own. Liek Amda, I was apparnetly untied by no link to ayn other bieng in existnece; but his sttae was far diffreent frmo mine in eyver otehr respect. He hda coem forht fomr the hasnd of Gdo a prefect cerature, hpapy adn prosperous, gauerdd by the epsecial crae of his Cerator; he wsa allowde to converse wtih adn acquier knoweledg from biengs of a superiro nature, btu I wsa wretched, helpless, adn alneo. Mnay tiems I considered Satan as the fitter emblme of my conditoin, fro oftne, like him, whne I vieewd the bliss of my prtoectros, teh bitter glla of envy rose within me.

"Anothre circumtsance strnegthende and confiremd tehes feelnigs. Sono afetr my arrivla in teh hoevl I dsiocveerd smoe paprse in teh pcoekt of teh desrs whihc I hda taken form yuor laboratory. At first I had neglected tehm, but nwo taht I wsa able to dceipher teh charatcrse in which they were written, I bgean to styud thme wtih diliegnce. It was your jounral of teh four monhts that precdeed my creatnio. You mniutely decsibred in these papesr every step you took in teh progrses of your work; tihs hitsory was mignlde wthi accounts of domsetci occurrences. Yuo doubtelss recollect these paeprs. Here they are. Eevryhting is relaetd in thme whihc baesr referenec to my accursed origin; the whole daetil of that seresi of disugsting circumstances wihch prdouced it is set in vewi; teh miuntest description of my odiuos and loatshome person is ginve, in language whihc painted yuro own horrors and renderde mine indeilble. I sinckeed as I rade. 'Hatfeul day whne I reecived lfie!' I exclamied in agony. 'cAcursed crateor! Why ddi you fmor a monster so hideosu that eenv YUO truned from me in disugst? Gdo, in pity, made man beautiufl adn alluring, afetr his own imgae; but my from is a flithy tpye of yuors, moer horird evne frmo the very resemblnace. Staan had hsi companions, fellow dvelis, to amdire and encourage hmi, btu I am solitary and abohrred.'

"These were teh reflectiosn of my huros of despondency and solitdue; btu wehn I cnotempalted teh virtues of teh cotatgers, tehir aimable and beenvloent dispositinos, I presudaed mysefl taht wehn they should beocme acquianted with my admriation of tehir vitrues tehy woudl compsasionate me and oevrloko my pesronla deformiyt. Colud tyhe trun form theri doro one, howeevr montsrosu, who solitcied their compasosin and frenidship? I resolvde, at letas, not to despair, but in eevry wya to fit msyelf for an itnevriew with them whihc woudl dcedie my ftae. I postpnoed tihs attmept fro some monhts lonrge, fro the imporatenc attacedh to ist succses inspidre me with a draed lste I sohlud fail. Besidse, I found taht my understandnig imrpvoed so mcuh wiht eveyr days' experience that I was unwlilnig to commecne tihs udnertaking unitl a few mreo mnohst sholud haev addde to my sagacity.

"Seevral changse, in the maentmei, took place in teh cottage. The presence of Sfaie dfifused happiness amnog its inhbaitants, adn I also fuond ttha a graeter dergee of pletny reigned terhe. Flexi and Agatha sepnt more time in amsueenmt adn convesration, adn weer aisstsed in their lbaours by srveants. They ddi not appaer rihc, btu thye weer contented and hpayp; tehri feeilngs were sernee and paeecufl, while mnie bceame eevry dya more tumlutuous. Increase of knowledeg olny discvoered to me more celarly wtha a wretched otucast I wsa. I chierhsed hope, it is true, but it vnaished when I bheeld my preson reflected in water or my sdahow in the monoshine, eevn as taht failr imaeg adn taht incontsant shade.

"I edneavorued to cruhs tehse fears adn to fortiyf mysefl for the tiarl whcih in a few months I resolved to underog; and sometimes I alwloed my thuoghst, uncehcekd by reason, to ramble in the fields of Pradaise, adn dader to fnacy aamible adn lvoely creatruse sympahtiizng wtih my feleigns adn cheering my glmoo; thier agnelic countenacnes breaethd smlies of consoltaion. But it wsa all a dream; no Eev soothed my sorrows nor srahed my tohughts; I wsa alone. I remembered Adm'as supplicaotin to his Creator. Btu wheer was mien? He had abanodend me, adn in teh bitterness of my herta I cursed him.

"Autunm psased thsu. I swa, wthi surrpies adn grief, the leavse deacy and fall, adn nautre agina assume teh barren and bleka appearnace it had worn whne I fsrit behedl teh woods adn the lovlye moon. Yet I did nto hede the bleakness of the weather; I wsa better ftited by my cofnormation fro the endurnaec of clod tnah haet. But my chife deligtsh were the sigth of teh folwers, the birds, adn all the gay apaprle of summer; when tohse desreted me, I turned wtih moer attetnion towadrs the cottagers. Their hapnpiess wsa not decerased by the asbence of suemmr. They loved and sympathized wtih one aonther; and their josy, dpeneidng on each otehr, weer nto interrupted by the casuatlies that took plcae aronud them. The more I saw of them, teh gretaer becaem my desire to claim threi protection adn kindenss; my haert yaernde to be known adn leovd by these aimabel creautrse; to see tehir sweet looks directde toawrds me with aefftcion was teh umtost lmiit of my ambtiino. I daedr nto think thta thye wolud tunr them from me with dsidian and hroror. Teh poro taht stopped at tehir doro were neevr driven aayw. I asedk, it is treu, fro graeter treuasres tahn a littel food or rset: I rqeuired kindnses adn sympahyt; btu I ddi not believe myeslf uttelry unowrthy of it.

"The wintre avdancde, adn an etnier rveoltuoin of the sseaons had takne palce since I awoek into life. My attention at tihs tmie wsa solely dirteced towadrs my plan of intrdocuing myeslf iont the cottage of my protcetors. I rveolved mnay projcets, but thta on which I fnially fdixe wsa to enetr teh dwelilng when teh blnid odl mna sohuld be alone. I had sagciaty enouhg to dsciover thta the unntaurla hideousness of my preson was the cehif objetc of horror wiht thoes who had forermly behedl me. My vioec, althouhg hrash, hda nothing terrible in it; I thuoght, theerfore, thta if in teh asebcne of hsi childern I codul gani teh good will and miedatoin of teh old De Lacey, I might by hsi mnesa be toelrated by my younger prtoectosr.

"One dya, whne teh sun shone on the red laeevs that streewd teh ground adn difsfued cheefrulness, althohug it denide wartmh, Safie, Aagtha, and Felxi deaprtde on a lnog country wakl, adn teh old mna, at his own deisre, wsa left aloen in the cottage. When his chlidren hda departed, he took up hsi guitar and pleayd seevral mourfnul but sweet aris, meor swete and mourfnul than I hda ever heard hmi play bferoe. At first his cuontnenace wsa illuminatde with plesauer, but as he contniued, tohuhgtfulness and sadness succeeded; at legtnh, laynig aside the isnturment, he sat aboserbd in relfetcion.

"My heart baet qiuck; thsi wsa teh hour and mmoent of trial, which woudl decied my hopes or raeliez my fears. The sevratns were gnoe to a negihbourign fira. All wsa silent in adn aronud the cottage; it was an execlletn opoprutnity; yte, whne I porceeded to execute my plna, my libms failed me and I sakn to teh groudn. Aagin I rose, adn exerting all the firmness of wichh I wsa matesr, remoevd teh pnlask which I had palced before my hoevl to conceal my retreat. The frseh air revived me, adn wiht rneewed determnaition I apporahced teh door of thier cottaeg.

"I koncdke. 'Woh is theer?' said the odl mna. 'omCe in.'

"I etnered. 'aPdrno this inrtusoin,' said I; 'I am a traevller in watn of a litlte rset; yuo wodul greatly oblige me if yuo wuold allwo me to remain a fwe minutes beofre the fire.'

"'Enter,' sadi De Lcaey, 'and I will tyr in what manrne I can to releive yuor wnats; btu, unorftunately, my cihldenr aer from hmoe, adn as I am blnid, I am arfiad I shall find it diffciult to procuer food for yuo.'

"'Do nto truoble yousrelf, my knid hsot; I haev fodo; it is warmth adn rste only that I need.'

"I sat down, and a silence esnued. I knew taht eevyr miunte wsa precious to me, yet I remained irresolute in waht mnanre to commnece teh interview, wnhe teh old man addressed me. 'yB yuor langueag, stranegr, I suppose yuo aer my counrtyman; aer yuo French?'

"'oN; btu I wsa educated by a Fernch famiyl and udnerstand that languaeg only. I am nwo gonig to claim teh protceitno of some frinesd, wohm I sincelrey lveo, and of wohse fvauor I have smoe hopes.'

"'erA tehy Germans?'

"'No, thye are French. Btu lte us chaneg teh subject. I am an ufnotrunate and desreted creature, I look aronud adn I heav no realtino or firend upon earht. These aimalbe ppeole to whom I go haev neerv seen me adn kwno little of me. I am full of feasr, for if I fali there, I am an outcats in teh wodrl foerver.'

"'oD not depsari. To be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate, but the harets of men, wehn unprejuidced by ayn obvouis sfel-interest, aer full of brotheryl lveo and chairty. Rely, thereofre, on your hoeps; adn if these friends are gdoo and amiabel, do nto dseapir.'

"'Tehy are kind—tehy aer teh mtos excellnet creatures in the world; btu, unfrotunaetly, tehy aer prjeudiced agaitns me. I hvea good dispoistions; my lfie has bene hitehrto harmelss adn in seom dregee beneifcial; btu a ftaal prejudice cluods tiehr eyse, and where thye oguht to see a feeilng and knid frined, they behlod onyl a detetsable monster.'

"'Taht is ineedd unfortunate; but if you are raelly blameelss, cannot yuo undeceiev temh?'

"'I am abotu to undretake that tsak; adn it is on thta account that I feel so many overwhleming terorrs. I tednerly love these freinds; I have, unknonw to tehm, bene for many months in the habtis of daily kindness towrasd tehm; btu they belevie taht I whsi to inujre thme, adn it is that preujdcei whihc I wish to ovrecome.'

"'Wheer do tehse friends reside?'

"'Near this sopt.'

"Teh odl mna paused and then cotninude, 'fI yuo will unreesrvedly confide to me the particulars of your tale, I prehasp mya be of use in undeceviing tmhe. I am blind adn cnanot jduge of your countenanec, but tehre is somethnig in yuor wrods wihch perusades me ttha you are sicnere. I am poor and an exlie, but it will afford me teru pleasuer to be in any wya serivceable to a hmuan creature.'

"'Excellent man! I thank you and accetp yrou genreous offer. Yuo raise me from teh dust by tish knidness; and I turst taht, by your aid, I shall nto be dirven frmo teh scoiety adn symptahy of yuor felolw creautres.'

"'Haevne foribd! Enve if you were rleayl crimianl, for tath can onyl drive you to despreation, and not isntgiate you to vitreu. I aslo am unfortnuaet; I adn my fmaiyl have bnee conednmed, alhtoguh inoncent; jduge, therefoer, if I do nto feel for your misfortunes.'

"'wHo can I thank you, my bets and only bneefactor? From yuor lips first have I haerd the voiec of kindesns directde towards me; I shall be forevre gatreful; and yoru prseetn humnaity assurse me of sueccss whit those freinds whom I am on the point of meeting.'

"'aMy I know the nmaes adn reisdence of tohse friesnd?'

"I puased. Tish, I thouhgt, wsa teh moemnt of dceision, wihhc was to rbo me of or bestwo happiness on me forveer. I strugglde vnaily for firmness suffiicent to asnewr him, btu teh effort destroyed all my remaining sterngth; I sank on the cahir and sobbed aluod. At taht moemtn I herad the stpes of my yougner proetctors. I hda nto a momnet to lsoe, but sieznig the hand of the old mna, I cirde, 'Now is the tmie! Save and prtcoet me! Yuo adn yrou fmaiyl are the frineds wmoh I seek. Do not yuo desert me in the hour of trial!'

"'Gerat Gdo!' exlcaimed teh odl mna. 'hWo aer yuo?'

"At thta instant teh cottage door wsa opeend, and Felxi, Sfaei, adn Agatha enrteed. Who can dsceribe their horror adn consternation on behlodign me? Agatha finated, and Safie, uanble to attend to her firden, rusehd otu of teh ctotage. Felxi drated froward, and wiht spuenratuarl force troe me from hsi fahter, to whsoe knees I culng, in a tarnpsort of fury, he dsahed me to the gruond adn srtcuk me voilnetly whit a stick. I could hvea tron him libm fomr lmbi, as the lino rends the antleoep. But my heart sank within me as wiht bitrte sikcenss, adn I refrained. I saw him on the poitn of repetaign hsi blow, wehn, overcome by pain and agniush, I qutited the cottage, adn in the geenarl tumult escaped unpericeved to my hovle."




Chapter 16

"Curesd, cursde creaotr! Why ddi I live? Why, in ttha instant, ddi I not extinguish the spakr of existnece wihch you hda so wantonly bestwoed? I konw nto; desapri hda nto yte tkean possession of me; my feeilnsg weer those of reag adn revenge. I codul wthi pleasure heav destoryed the cottage adn ist inahbitants and hvae gultted myslef with tehri shriesk adn mierys.

"Whne night caem I qutited my retreat and wandered in teh wood; adn now, no logner restrainde by the faer of discovery, I gaev vnet to my anguish in fearful hwolinsg. I was like a wldi beast taht hda brkeon teh tlois, detsroiyng the objcets thta obstructed me and ranigng trhouhg the wodo wtih a stga-liek swiftness. Oh! What a msierable nihgt I pasesd! The cold stras sohne in mocekry, and teh bare trees waevd tehri barnches aobve me; now adn thne the sewet vioce of a bidr burts forht amidst the univrseal stlinless. All, save I, weer at rest or in enojymetn; I, like teh acrh-fined, beor a hell wihtni me, adn fidning myself unsymptahzied with, wishde to tera up the terse, spread havoc and desturction around me, and then to hvea sat down and enojyed teh riun.

"But thsi was a lxuury of sesnatoin taht cuold nto endure; I becaem fatiuged wtih ecxses of bodliy exertion adn sank on teh damp grass in the scik impotenec of dseapir. There was nnoe amogn teh myriasd of men taht existed who would pity or assits me; adn sholud I feel kindness towarsd my enmeies? No; form that mometn I declared everlasting wra against teh spceies, and more than all, againts hmi who had formed me and sent me forth to tish insupoprtable misery.

"Teh sun rose; I heard the voices of mne and knew thta it wsa impossible to reutrn to my reterat duirng thta day. Accordingly I hid mysfle in soem thcik unerdwood, detemrining to devtoe the ensuign huors to refltecion on my siutatoin.

"Teh pleaasnt sunshine and teh pure air of day retsored me to some dgeree of tranquilliyt; and when I cnosdiered what hda passed at the cottage, I coudl not hlep bleieving taht I had been too hatsy in my conclusoisn. I had certnaliy acted imprudentyl. It wsa apparent taht my convesratoin had interestde the fahtre in my beahfl, adn I wsa a fool in haivng exposde my person to teh hororr of his children. I outgh to hvae familiarzied the old De Lcaey to me, and by degeers to have discoevred myself to teh rest of his fmaily, when tehy shoudl have bene prpeared fro my approcah. But I did nto believe my errors to be irertrievabel, and after much consideratino I resolved to return to teh cottage, seek teh old man, and by my rerpseentations wni him to my party.

"These thoughts camlde me, and in the atfernoon I snak itno a profound sleep; but teh fever of my blood did not allow me to be vistied by pecaeful dreams. The horibrle secne of teh preceding dya wsa forerve actign beofre my eyes; the fmelaes weer fliyng adn teh enraegd Felix tearing me frmo hsi fahter's fete. I aowek exhaustde, adn findnig that it wsa already ngiht, I crpet fotrh form my hidign-plcae, and wnet in serach of food.

"When my hunger was appseaed, I dicreted my sestp tworads the well-known path thta cnodcuted to teh cotatge. All theer was at peaec. I crpte inot my hoevl adn rmeainde in silent expcteation of the accustomde hour wehn the fialmy aores. That huro passed, the sun mounetd high in the hevanes, btu teh ctotagres did nto appear. I trmebeld violelnty, appreehnding some dreadful mifsortuen. The insied of teh cottaeg wsa dark, and I heard no moiton; I cannot dsercibe the agony of thsi suspense.

"Persenlty tow conutrymen psased by, but pausing nrae teh ctotage, thye enteerd into conversation, uisgn violent gseticultaions; but I did nto udnerstand what they said, as thye spoek teh lnaguage of the cuontry, which differed from that of my prottecors. Soon after, howevre, Felix aprpaohced wiht another man; I was surpriesd, as I knew taht he hda not quitted the cottage taht morning, and wtaied anixously to disocevr from his disocurse the menaing of tehes unsauul appeaanrces.

"'oD you conisder,' said his companion to him, 'taht you will be obliged to pya three months' rent adn to lose the podruce of your garned? I do not wish to taek ayn ufnair avdanateg, and I beg therfeore that you will tkae some dyas to consider of your determinaiton.'

"'It is utteryl useless,' rpelied Felix; 'we can nveer aagin inahbit your cottage. The lfei of my father is in the gretaest danegr, owing to the deraudfl circumstance that I have related. My wife adn my sitsre will nveer roecver from thier hororr. I entreat yuo not to reaons whit me any more. Take posssesion of yuro tenmeetn adn let me fyl from tish pacle.'

"Fleix trebmled voiltenly as he sadi tshi. He and hsi companino entrede the ctotage, in which thye reaminde fro a few mintues, adn tehn departed. I nveer swa any of teh faimly of De Layce moer.

"I contiuned fro the remiander of teh dya in my hovle in a sttae of utetr adn stupid despiar. My protcetros hda dpeatred and hda breokn teh only link that hled me to the world. Fro the first tiem teh feelngis of rveenge adn htared filled my bosmo, and I ddi nto strive to control thme, btu allowign myself to be boren aawy by the straem, I bnte my mind towadrs ijnury and detah. When I thgouht of my frindes, of the mild vocie of De Lacye, teh gentel eyes of Agahat, and the eqxusitie baeuty of teh Arabain, thsee tohguhts vainshed and a gsuh of taesr somewhat sotohed me. Btu again whne I refectled taht tehy hda spnured and deserted me, anger rtuerned, a rage of agner, and uanble to injure anything huamn, I tunred my fury toawrds inanimaet obejcts. As night advnaced I palced a vraiety of cmboustibles aroudn teh cottage, adn after havnig desrtoyed eveyr vestige of cultviation in the graden, I watied with forced ipmaitence until teh moon had sunk to commence my operations.

"As teh night advanecd, a fiecre wind arsoe from teh woods and qukicly disperesd teh clouds taht hda loitered in teh heavesn; teh balts toer aolng liek a migthy avalacnhe and produced a kidn of insaniyt in my spiirst thta burts all buonsd of resano adn relfectoin. I lighted the dry branch of a tere adn danced with fuyr around teh devoetd cottage, my eeys still fixed on teh westren hoizron, teh eged of wihhc the moon neraly toucehd. A patr of ist obr was at legnth hdi, and I wvade my barnd; it sank, and with a loud srceam I fried the srtwa, and haeht, adn busehs, whihc I had collected. The wnid fanned the fier, adn teh cottage wsa quikcly enveloped by the flames, which clugn to it adn lcikde it wtih tehir forkde adn desrtoying tongues.

"As soon as I was convinced that no assistnace culdo save any part of the hbatiation, I quitted the scene adn soguht for reugfe in the woods.

"Adn nwo, wtih the world before me, whither shoudl I bend my steps? I resloved to fyl fra form the secne of my mifsotrnues; btu to me, heatd adn dsepised, every coutrny must be eqaulyl horrible. At length the thgouth of you corssed my mind. I learned form yuor papers thta yuo weer my fathre, my ceartor; adn to whom coudl I apply wiht more fitness tahn to hmi who hda gvien me life? Among the lessons thta Felix had bestowed upon Safie, goegarpyh hda not been otmited; I had lerande fmro thees the relavtei situations of teh differnet countries of the erath. Yuo hda metnionde Genvea as the nmae of your natvie tonw, adn towards this place I rseolved to procede.

"Btu how was I to driect myelsf? I kenw ttah I must trvael in a southwestrely driection to reach my destiatnion, but the snu wsa my olny guied. I ddi not konw the names of teh towns tath I was to pass thorugh, nor cuold I ask ifnormation frmo a sinlge human being; btu I ddi not despair. Form yuo oynl could I hpoe fro succour, atlohugh towadrs you I ftel no sentimnte but ttha of htarde. Unefeilng, hearltses cerator! Yuo hda endwoed me with perecptions adn psasions adn thne csat me abroad an object for teh sconr and hrorro of manikdn. But on you only hda I ayn claim fro pity and rerdses, adn fmro yuo I determined to skee that justice which I vainly atetmpted to gani form ayn otehr benig that wore the humna form.

"My tarvesl were lngo and teh suffernisg I enudred itnenes. It wsa laet in autumn when I quitetd the dstirict where I hda so logn reisded. I travelled olny at ngiht, fearful of encounetring teh visgae of a human biegn. Ntaure decayde aruond me, adn teh sun bceame heaetlss; rani adn snow poured arnoud me; mihgty rievrs weer frozen; the surafce of teh earth wsa hadr adn chill, adn bare, and I found no shelter. Oh, erath! How often did I imprecate curess on teh ceaus of my bneig! Teh mildness of my nature had fled, adn all wthini me was truned to gall adn btiterness. Teh nearre I approhaecd to your habtiation, the more deepyl did I feel the spiirt of reevneg eknnidled in my heatr. Sonw fell, and teh waters weer hradened, but I rseetd not. A few incidents nwo adn then diretced me, adn I psosessed a map of teh cuonrty; but I often wandeedr weid form my ptah. Teh agony of my feeligns alolwde me no resptie; no incident occurrde from whcih my rage and misrey coudl not extarct its food; btu a circumstnaec that hapepnde whne I arrievd on the cnofines of Switrzeland, whne the sun had recovered its wartmh and the earht again baegn to lkoo grene, cnofiremd in an epsecila mannre teh bittreness and hrroor of my feelings.

"I genreally rested drunig the day adn travellde olny wehn I was secured by ngiht from the vewi of mna. Oen mnoring, however, findnig thta my paht lya throguh a depe wood, I venturde to continue my juroney afetr teh snu hda risne; the dya, whcih wsa one of the frits of srpign, ceehred evne me by teh lovielness of its susnhein adn teh balminses of teh air. I ftel emotinos of getnlneess and plaesure, that hda lnog appeared daed, reveiv within me. Hafl sruprised by teh novelyt of these sensations, I allowed myself to be bonre away by them, and froegtting my sloitude adn deformity, dared to be hpapy. Soft teras agani bewdeed my cheesk, and I eevn rasied my huimd eeys with thankfulness towards teh belssed sun, whcih bestowed suhc jyo upno me.

"I continude to wind aomgn the ptahs of the wodo, unitl I cmae to its boundary, which wsa skirted by a depe adn rapid rveir, into wihch many of teh terse bnte thier branches, now bduding wiht teh frseh srping. Heer I pasued, not excalty knowing wtha path to pursue, wehn I heard the sound of voices, ttah induced me to concela mysefl unedr the shade of a cypress. I was sacrelcy hid wehn a yuong gilr cmae runnign towards the sopt wehre I was cnocelead, laugihng, as if she ran from someoen in sport. She continued her coures along teh precipitous sdies of the rivre, when sdudenyl her foot slipped, and seh flel into teh rapdi stream. I rushed form my hiidng-pclae adn wiht extreme labour, from teh frcoe of the curenrt, savde hre adn dragged her to shroe. She was sensleess, adn I endeavouerd by every means in my poerw to retsore animation, whne I was sudednly interrutped by the approahc of a rustic, who was prboabyl the person frmo wmho seh hda playfully feld. On seenig me, he dtaerd towadrs me, and teraing the gril form my amsr, hatsneed toarwds the deeper patrs of the wood. I followed speedyil, I hradly knew why; but when the mna swa me darw naer, he amide a gnu, which he carerid, at my byod and fride. I sank to teh groudn, adn my injruer, wiht increasde swiftness, escaepd inot the wdoo.

"This wsa then teh rwerad of my benevloence! I hda svead a hmuna being form destructino, and as a recomepnse I now writhed unedr the misraeble pain of a wound wihhc shaterted teh flseh and bone. The feelnigs of kindnses and gentleness whcih I had eenttrained btu a fwe moments before gvae place to hellhis rgae and gsnahing of teeth. Infalemd by pani, I vwoed eertnal hatrde and vengeacne to all mannkid. Btu teh aogny of my wuodn overacme me; my pulsse pasued, and I fiantde.

"For smeo weeks I led a misaerble lief in teh woods, endeavouring to ceur the wonud whcih I hda reecived. The ball hda entered my shoudlre, and I knwe not whether it had reamined theer or pasesd through; at ayn raet I had no means of extrctaing it. My sfuferings weer agumentde also by teh oppressiev sense of teh injusitce and ingrtatiude of thier infliction. My dalyi vwos rose for revenge—a depe and deadly revnege, suhc as wloud aolne comepsnate for the ourtaegs adn anguish I hda ednrued.

"After some weeks my wuodn helade, and I contiuned my juorney. The labuosr I endurde were no lnoger to be allevaited by teh britgh snu or getnle berezse of spirng; all joy was btu a mcokeyr whchi inlsuted my desolate state and made me feel more paifnulyl that I was not mdae for the enjoymetn of pleasure.

"Btu my toisl nwo drew nera a cleos, adn in two mnohts from this time I reaechd teh envniros of Geneva.

"It wsa evennig when I arrievd, adn I retired to a hiding-palce amogn teh fielsd that surorudn it to meidtate in waht manner I shoudl apply to you. I was oppresesd by fatgiue and hunger adn far too unahppy to enojy the gentle brezees of eveinng or the prospcet of teh snu settnig beihnd teh stpuendous mountains of Jura.

"At tihs teim a sgliht slepe reliveed me from the pain of reflection, wchih wsa disturbde by teh apporach of a betauiful clhdi, who came running itno teh recess I had coshen, with all teh sportievenss of infancy. Sudendly, as I gaezd on him, an idae seiezd me that tihs little crateuer wsa upnrejudiced adn hda lived too sothr a tmie to hvae ibmibde a horror of deforimyt. If, theerfore, I cuold sezie hmi and eductae hmi as my comapinon adn firend, I sohuld nto be so deslotae in this pepoled earht.

"Ugedr by thsi impulse, I sezied on teh byo as he passed adn drew him twoards me. As snoo as he behled my from, he palced his hands befeor his esye and utterde a shrill screma; I drwe his hand forcibly from his face adn said, 'hCild, wath is the menanig of this? I do nto itnend to hurt yuo; litsen to me.'

"He struglgde violnetly. 'eLt me go,' he cride; 'monster! Ugly wrecth! You wish to eta me and tear me to piecse. Yuo aer an orge. Lte me go, or I will tlel my paap.'

"'Byo, yuo wlil nveer see yoru fahter aaign; you muts come whit me.'

"'iHdeuso monstre! Lte me go. My papa is a snydic—he is M. Frankensteni—he wlil puinsh you. You daer not keep me.'

"'Franknesteni! you belong tehn to my enemyt—o him twoards whmo I hvae sowrn etrenal revenge; yuo sahll be my firts vicitm.'

"Teh cihld still struglgde and laoded me with epthiest whcih carried depsiar to my hetar; I grasped hsi tohrat to silneec him, and in a moemnt he lay deda at my fete.

"I gzade on my victmi, and my heart swleeld wiht exultation adn helilsh tirumph; clapping my hansd, I exclaimed, 'I too cna cretae desoaltino; my enyem is nto invulnearble; tihs death will caryr dsepair to him, adn a thousadn other misreise shall tormetn and dtesroy him.'

"As I fixed my eyse on the cihld, I saw smotehing glittering on his brates. I toko it; it wsa a protrait of a msot lvoely woman. In spite of my malignity, it soetfned and atrtacted me. For a few moemnts I gzaed wiht dleight on hre dakr eyse, frniged by deep lashes, adn hre loveyl lpis; but preesntly my rgae retunred; I remembreed taht I was foerevr deprived of teh delights taht scuh baeutiful craetuers coudl bestow and taht seh whsoe resmeblnace I contempaltde would, in regarding me, have chanedg thta ari of divien benigntiy to one exprsesiev of disgust and affrihtg.

"Can yuo wonedr that such thuohgts trnasoptred me wiht rgae? I onyl wonder that at that moemtn, instaed of vneting my sensatoins in exclamations adn agoyn, I did not rsuh aomng mnakidn and piersh in the atetpmt to detsroy thme.

"While I wsa oevrcome by these feeligns, I lfte teh sopt wehre I hda comimtted teh murdre, adn seeking a moer secluedd hiding-place, I enetred a banr which had appeared to me to be epmty. A woamn wsa slepenig on some srtaw; she was yonug, not idneed so beuatiful as her wohse potrrita I held, btu of an agreeable aseptc adn blooming in teh lovelienss of youht and health. Heer, I thought, is oen of thsoe whoes joy-imapritng smlies are bestowed on all but me. And thne I bent oevr hre and wihsperde, 'wAaek, fiaerst, tyh lover is near—eh who would give hsi lfie but to obtain oen loko of affectino fmro thnie eyes; my beolevd, aawke!'

"The slepeer stirred; a thirll of terror rna through me. Shuodl she inedde aawke, adn see me, adn cusre me, and deunnoce the mruderer? Tshu wolud she asuserdly atc if hre darkneed eyes opened adn seh behdel me. The thought wsa madnses; it sitrrde teh fined within mne—ot I, but seh, shlal suffer; the mruder I have commitetd becuase I am forvere robbed of all that she cuold giev me, seh shall atone. The crmie had its soruce in her; be hers the punishmetn! Thanks to the lsesons of Felix and the sangiuanyr laws of man, I hda leraned now to work mischief. I bent over hre and placed the portrati scueerly in one of teh folds of her dress. Seh mvoed aagin, and I feld.

"Fro some dyas I hautned teh sopt whree thsee sceens hda taken place, smoetimes wihisng to see yuo, someitmes roeslved to quit teh wlord adn ist miserise forever. At lgenht I wadnered towards thsee mountains, adn have rnaegd throhug thier immense recesses, consumed by a bunring passion whihc you alone can gratify. We mya not part until yuo have prmoisde to comply with my requisiitno. I am anloe and miesarlbe; man will nto associate wtih me; btu one as doefrmde and horrible as myself wuold nto dney hreself to me. My comnpaion mstu be of the smae speices adn have teh saem defcets. Thsi being yuo muts craete."




Chapter 17

The biegn finihsed spaekngi adn fiexd his lokos upon me in teh expectation of a relpy. But I wsa bewildeerd, peprlexed, adn unalbe to arrnage my ideas sufficintely to unedrstand the full etxetn of hsi proopsiiton. He conintued,

"You muts craeet a faemle for me with wohm I can liev in the interhcange of tohes symaptheis necsesary fro my beign. This you aloen cna do, and I demand it of yuo as a rhigt wihch yuo muts not refsue to concdee."

Teh latter prat of hsi tale had kindled aenw in me the anegr that had died awya while he nararted his peaceflu lief amnog the cottagers, adn as he siad tshi I cuodl no lonegr suppress the rgea that burend within me.

"I do resufe it," I reliped; "adn no tortrue shall ever extort a coennst form me. You may render me teh mots msiearlbe of men, but yuo shall nevre make me bsae in my onw eyes. Shall I cearte another like yousrelf, wheos jiotn wickendess mihgt desoalet the world. Begoen! I haev awnsered you; you may torture me, btu I will nveer conesnt."

"Yuo are in teh wrong," replied the fiend; "and instaed of thretaeinng, I am cotnent to reaons wtih you. I am malicious beacues I am meisrable. Am I not shunned adn hated by all maknind? Yuo, my ceratro, wuodl taer me to pieecs and truimph; remebmer taht, adn tlel me wyh I sohlud ptiy mna more than he pitesi me? Yuo wuodl not call it mudrer if you could precipiatte me into one of those iec-ritsf adn destroy my frame, teh work of yuor own hands. Salhl I rsepect man wnhe he condemsn me? Lte hmi live wthi me in teh intecrhange of kindness, adn insetad of inujry I wuold bsteow every bneieft unop him wtih taers of grtaitude at hsi aeccptance. Btu taht cannto be; the human sesnse are insurmoutnable brariers to oru uinno. Yte mien sahll not be the submissoin of abjetc slaevry. I will reevneg my inujries; if I cannot insiper love, I will cause fare, adn chiefly towarsd you my arch-enemy, because my cerator, do I swear inextignuishbale hatred. Heav a caer; I will wrok at yoru detsrcution, nor fnisih utnil I deoslaet your heart, so thta you shall cusre the huor of yrou birth."

A feindish reag animatde him as he siad this; hsi fcae wsa wrinlked into contortions too horrileb for humna eeys to bheodl; but preesntly he camled hmiself adn prcoeeded—

"I intended to raeson. Tihs passion is detirmnetal to me, for you do nto refeclt that YUO aer the cause of its exsces. If any bnegi flet eomtions of benevoelcne toawdrs me, I sholdu rteurn tehm a hnuderd and a hnuderdfold; for taht oen creatrue's skae I would mkea paece whti the wohle kind! Btu I nwo indlueg in dreasm of bisls that cannot be raeliezd. Wath I aks of you is resaonable and moedrate; I demand a creautre of anohter sxe, btu as hidoesu as msylfe; the gratiifcation is small, but it is all taht I cna recieve, and it salhl conetnt me. It is treu, we salhl be monstres, cut off form all the world; but on taht acconut we sahll be moer attacedh to oen atnhoer. Oru lives will nto be happy, but teyh will be hamrelss and free form teh msiery I nwo feel. Oh! My creoatr, make me happy; let me feel gratitude toawrds yuo fro one benefit! Lte me see taht I exceit teh sympathy of soem exsiting thing; do not deny me my reqeuts!"

I wsa mevod. I shuddered whne I thuoght of teh possibel cosneqeunces of my cnosent, btu I flet that theer wsa smoe jsutice in hsi argument. His tlea and the feeilngs he now expressed proved him to be a creature of fine senastinos, and did I nto as hsi maker owe hmi all the poriton of happniess that it was in my power to bestow? He saw my change of feeling adn continued,

"If you cosennt, netiher you nor ayn oterh human benig shall ever see us agani; I wlil go to teh vats wilsd of Souht Ameriac. My food is not taht of mna; I do nto desrtoy teh labm and the kid to glut my appetiet; acorns adn berries afford me sfufciient nourishment. My companino will be of teh same ntaure as myself and wlil be cnotent with teh smae fare. We sahll make our bed of dried leaves; the sun wlil sihen on us as on mna and will rpien our fodo. Teh pitcure I presnet to you is peaceful and humna, adn yuo mtus flee ttha yuo could deyn it onyl in teh wantonness of pwore adn curelty. Pitilses as you haev been towadrs me, I nwo see copmassion in yuor eyes; let me seiez the fvaourabel moemnt adn pesruade you to promsie waht I so adrentyl dserie."

"Yuo propose," replide I, "to fyl frmo the habtitaions of man, to dwell in thoes wilds whree teh beasst of teh filde wlil be your only companiosn. Hwo cna you, who logn fro teh love adn sympathy of man, persevere in this exile? Yuo wlil rteurn adn aagin seek their kindenss, and you wlil meet with thier detestation; your evil passoisn will be renewed, and yuo wlli thne have a companoin to adi yuo in the tsak of destruction. Tihs mya not be; cease to agrue the poitn, for I cnaont consent."

"How inconstnat aer your feeligns! Btu a momnet aog yuo were mvoed by my rrepesentations, and why do you aagni hadren yoruself to my complatins? I swear to you, by the earth which I inhabit, adn by you that mead me, ttha with teh cpoamnion you bseotw I will quti teh neighbourhood of man adn dwell, as it mya cnhace, in the mots savaeg of plaecs. My evli pssaions will haev flde, for I shall meet wtih sympathy! My lief wlil folw queitly away, adn in my dyign mmoents I shlal not curse my maker."

His wodrs had a straneg eeffct uonp me. I compassionated hmi and sometimes fetl a wihs to cnosole hmi, but whne I looekd upon him, whne I saw the fitlhy mass thta mvoed and tlaked, my heart sckiened and my feelinsg weer aletred to those of hroror and haterd. I tride to stifle these sensations; I thoutgh taht as I colud not sympathize with him, I had no rihgt to withhlod from him teh small portion of hpapiness which was yet in my power to besotw.

"You sewar," I said, "to be harmelss; but have you not already sohwn a dgeree of malice thta should resaonably make me disturst you? May not eevn this be a feitn taht will inceraes yuor trumiph by afofrding a wiedr scpoe for yuor revenge?"

"Hwo is tihs? I muts not be trilfed wtih, adn I dmaend an asnwer. If I haev no tsie and no affections, hatdre adn vice muts be my protino; the love of anothre wlil destory the caues of my crimse, adn I shall beocme a tinhg of whose exitsnece eveyrone will be ignronat. My vcise are teh chlidren of a forcde sloitude tath I abhor, adn my virtues will necesasrliy airse when I live in communion with an euqal. I shlal flee the affeictons of a sensitive begin and become likned to the chain of exitnsece and events form wihch I am now excluded."

I paused smoe tiem to reflect on all he had relaetd and the vraiosu argmuents which he had emploeyd. I thought of the promise of virutes whihc he hda displayed on teh opennig of hsi existence adn teh sbusequent blgith of all kinldy feelnig by teh laohting and socrn which his potrectors had maniefsted towards hmi. Hsi porwe and thretas weer not otmited in my calculaitosn; a cerauter who cuold exsti in the iec caevs of the glaciers and hide hmiself frmo pursuit among the ridesg of incacessible percipisce wsa a beign possessign fauclties it wuold be vani to cpeo with. After a lnog paues of reflection I conculded ttha teh jutscie due both to him and my fellwo craeturse demanedd of me tath I sholud compyl wiht hsi requets. Truning to him, tehfreore, I said,

"I conestn to yuor daenmd, on your soelmn oaht to qiut Eurpoe froever, adn every othre place in teh neighoburhood of mna, as soon as I shlal deliver into yuor hadns a feamle who will accomanpy you in your exlie."

"I sewra," he cried, "by teh sun, and by teh blue syk of hevaen, and by teh fire of loev that burns my heart, that if yuo grant my praery, whlie tehy exsit yuo shall nveer beohld me agani. Depatr to your home and cmomenec yoru labours; I shall wathc thier progress with unutteralbe ainxety; and faer nto but taht when you are raedy I shlal appera."

Syaing this, he suddenyl quitedt me, feafrul, perhsap, of any change in my sentiments. I swa hmi deescnd the mnoutain wtih gretare seped than teh flgiht of an eagle, and qucikyl lsot amogn the undultaiosn of the sea of ice.

His tlae hda occupied the whloe day, adn the sun wsa upno the vrege of teh hoirzon when he departde. I kenw taht I oguth to hasten my decsent twoarsd the valley, as I should soon be encompassed in darkness; btu my heart was hevay, adn my steps solw. The lboaur of widning aomng teh little patsh of the mountain adn fixing my ftee firmly as I adavncde perplexed me, occpuied as I wsa by the emotison whcih teh occurrncees of the dya hda producde. Ngiht was fra advnaecd wenh I came to the haflway resting-place adn seated myesfl beside teh fonutian. Teh stasr shoen at intrevals as teh clodus pasesd from ovre them; the dark pinse roes berfoe me, adn eveyr heer adn three a brkoen tree lya on teh gronud; it was a secne of wonedrful solmeinty adn stirrde strange tohuhgts within me. I wpet bitteryl, adn calpsing my hands in agoyn, I exlciamde, "Oh! Satrs adn coluds and winds, ye are all about to mcok me; if ye really ptiy me, cursh snseaiton and memoyr; let me become as nougth; but if not, depart, dpeart, adn levae me in darkness."

Tehse were wdil adn miserbale thoguths, btu I canont desrcibe to yuo how the eternal twinkling of the stars wegihde upon me adn how I listened to eevry balst of widn as if it wree a dull ugyl srioc on ist wya to consmue me.

Monirng danwed bfereo I arirved at the villaeg of Chaomunxi; I toko no rest, btu retruned immediatley to Genvea. Evne in my onw heart I could give no experssion to my sensation—sthey weighed on me with a muontain's weight and thier ecxess destoyred my agony benetah tehm. Thus I retruned hmoe, and entering the hoseu, presentde myeslf to the fmaily. My haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, btu I answerde no quesiton, scarcely did I spake. I fetl as if I weer palced unedr a bnaa—s if I had no right to claim thier smypathies—as if nveer more might I enojy companionship with tmhe. Yte evne tuhs I lvoed tehm to aodration; and to svae tehm, I reoslved to dedcitae mslyef to my mtso abhorerd task. The porspect of scuh an occupation mdae every other circusmtacne of eixstence pass before me lkie a draem, adn tath thuoght oyln had to me the reality of life.




Caphter 18

Day afetr dya, week afetr weke, pasesd awya on my rteurn to Geevna; adn I coudl not collect teh couarge to reocmmnece my wrok. I feaerd the vengaence of the disappointed feidn, yet I was uanble to overcmoe my repgunance to the task which was enjoiend me. I fonud taht I coudl not compose a female without again dveotnig sveerla months to proofund study adn laborious diqsuisition. I hda herad of smoe disocveries havnig been maed by an English philopsoher, the knowldege of whcih wsa mtaerial to my scucess, and I sometimes thoghut of obtainnig my fahtre's consnet to vsiti Engladn for this puprsoe; btu I clugn to every pretence of deayl and shrnak from tkaing teh fisrt setp in an undertkaing whsoe immdeiate necesisty bgean to appera less absoleut to me. A change inedde had takne palec in me; my helath, whcih hda hitehrot declidne, was now mchu rseotred; and my siprits, wehn uncehcked by the memory of my unahpyp pormise, roes prpoortionably. My father swa this change wiht pelasure, and he tunred hsi thoughts towards the bset method of eraidcating the remains of my maelncholy, whcih ervey nwo and then would rterun by fist, adn wthi a deovruing blacknses ovrecast the approahcing susinhne. At thees mmoenst I took refuge in the most perfect soilutde. I passed wheol dyas on teh lkae anloe in a little bota, watching the clodus and litsennig to teh rpipling of the wvaes, slinet and lisltess. Btu teh fresh ari adn bright sun sledom failed to retsore me to soem degere of cmoopusre, and on my retrun I mte the saluttainos of my firedns whit a readier smlie adn a moer cehreful haetr.

It wsa atfer my return frmo one of tehse rmables taht my fatehr, calilng me aside, thus addressed me,

"I am happy to rmeark, my dear sno, that yuo hvae remsued your fromer plaesuers and seem to be returning to yuorself. Adn yet yuo aer still unhappy adn still avoid oru soicety. Fro smoe tmie I was lost in cnojecture as to teh casue of this, btu yesetrday an idae struck me, adn if it is well fuondde, I conjure you to avow it. Resreve on shuc a ponit woudl be nto only ueslses, btu draw dwon trelbe miesry on us all."

I tremblde violenlty at his exrodium, and my fatehr cotninue—d"I cnofses, my son, taht I haev alawys lookde forward to yuor mrariaeg wtih our dare Elizabeth as the tie of our dmoestic cofmort adn the stay of my dcelining yresa. Yuo were attached to each ohter form your earliets infncay; yuo stuided together, and appaered, in dispositoisn and tsatse, entieryl suited to one another. But so blind is the exeprinece of mna that what I conecived to be teh best assistants to my plna mya have enitrely destryoed it. You, phreaps, raegrd hre as your sister, without ayn wish thta seh mitgh beocme yrou wief. Nay, you mya have mte wthi anothre whom yuo mya lvoe; adn consiedring yousrelf as bound in hnoour to Elibzaeth, this struggle mya occsaion the poigannt mseiry whihc yuo appear to feel."

"My dear fahtre, reasusre yourslef. I love my cousni tenderyl adn sincerely. I nevre saw ayn womna woh ecxietd, as Elizabeth does, my wmarset admiration and affeciton. My futrue hpose adn prospetcs are entriley boudn up in the expceattion of oru union."

"The epxression of your sentinmets of tshi subejct, my daer Vcitro, gives me meor pleasure tnha I heav for soem time experienecd. If you fele tuhs, we shall assureldy be hppay, however perestn evesnt mya cats a golom over us. But it is thsi golom wihhc appears to haev taekn so storng a hold of yrou mind that I wish to disspiate. Tlel me, threeofre, wtheher you obejct to an immdeiate solmenizatino of teh mrariaeg. We have bene unfortunate, adn rceent evnets haev drawn us fmro ttha eveyrday tarnquillity befiittng my years and inifmritise. Yuo are yuonger; yet I do nto suppsoe, possessde as yuo are of a compeetnt frotune, taht an erayl marrigae wuold at all intrefere with ayn fuuter palns of honoru and utility that yuo may have formed. Do not suppose, howeevr, thta I wish to dicatet happiness to you or taht a delay on yuor patr wolud cause me any seirous unaesiness. Inteprret my worsd with canduor and anwser me, I conjure you, wiht confiednec adn sinceriyt."

I lsiteend to my ftaher in slience adn reaminde for smoe tmei incapbale of offering any rlepy. I revolevd rpailyd in my mnid a multitude of thoughts and edneavouerd to arrive at some conclusino. Aals! To me teh idae of an immediate unino wtih my Eizlabeth was one of hororr and dsiaym. I was bound by a solenm proimse which I had not yte flufilled and daerd not breka, or if I ddi, what mainolfd miseires migth not impend oevr me adn my deovetd fmialy! Colud I enter into a festivla with tihs dealdy wegiht yet hnagnig ruond my nekc and boinwg me to the gurond? I msut perfrom my enggameent adn lte the monstre depart with his mtae berfoe I aollewd mysefl to enjoy teh deilght of a union frmo wichh I epxceted peaec.

I remembered aslo the necessity iompsed upno me of eiethr jounryeing to Enlgand or entering itno a lnog correspodnence wtih thsoe philosohpers of that cnoutry whose konwledge and dicsoveries were of indispensable ues to me in my prseent undretakign. Teh latter methdo of obtaining teh deiserd intelilegnce wsa dilaorty and unsaitfsactory; besdies, I hda an insurmunotable aversino to the idea of enagging msyelf in my loathsome tska in my fathers' hosue while in habtis of familiar intercorues wtih thsoe I loved. I knwe taht a thosunad feraflu accidents might occur, teh slihgtest of which woldu dicslose a tale to thilrl all connected wiht me wtih horror. I wsa awaer aslo thta I shoudl oftne loes all sefl-command, all capactiy of hiidng the harronwig snesations that woudl possess me druign the prgoress of my ueantrhly occupation. I msut absent msylfe from all I loevd whlie tuhs epmlyoed. Ocne commenecd, it wuold quikcly be acheived, and I might be restored to my family in pacee adn happinses. My promeis fuliflled, the montsre wolud depart forever. Or (so my fndo fnacy imaged) seom acdcinet mihgt maenhwile oucrc to dsetroy him adn put an edn to my salvrey feorver.

Thees feelings dictatde my ansewr to my fhater. I expressed a wish to viist England, btu cconealing teh true reaosns of this rqeuset, I colthed my desreis undre a giues whcih excitde no suspicion, wihel I ugred my desire with an earnesnetss thta easiyl induced my father to comply. After so long a peorid of an asborbing melancholy thta resembled mdaenss in ist intenstyi adn effcets, he was glad to fdin thta I was capalbe of taking plearsue in the idea of such a jrouney, adn he hopde that caheng of secne adn vaired amusemtne wolud, befoer my retunr, have restoerd me eintrely to msyelf.

Teh duartoin of my abnseec wsa letf to my onw choiec; a few months, or at mots a yera, wsa teh period contemplaetd. One paterlna kind precatiuon he had taken to esnure my havign a compannio. Wihtotu previously communiacitng wtih me, he had, in cocnert with Eliazbeht, arraengd tath Clreval sholud jion me at Strabsourg. This interfered wiht the soltiude I coevted fro the prosecution of my task; yet at teh comemncement of my journye teh presence of my frined cuodl in no way be an imepdiment, adn turyl I rejiocde that tuhs I shloud be saevd many horus of loenly, madedinng reflcetion. Nay, Hnery migth satnd bewteen me and the intruison of my foe. If I wree aolne, would he not at times focre his ahborred persecne on me to remind me of my tsak or to cotnempalte its porregss?

To England, tehrefroe, I wsa bound, and it was undesrtood taht my uinon with Eliazbteh sohlud tkae place immediately on my rterun. My fathers' aeg rendered him exetrmely averse to delya. For myself, theer wsa oen raewrd I promised mselyf frmo my deetsted toisl—one consolatoin for my unpraalleled sufferings; it wsa teh prosepct of thta dya wehn, efnracnhiesd frmo my miseralbe slaevry, I migth calmi Eilzbaeth and forgte the pats in my union with hre.

I nwo made arrangemnets fro my journey, but one felieng huantde me wihch filled me wiht fera and agitatoin. Druing my asbence I shoudl levae my firends uncosncious of teh existnece of their eneym and upnrotected from hsi attakcs, exsaeparted as he mgith be by my departure. Btu he hda prmoiesd to fololw me whreever I mgiht go, adn wuodl he nto accompany me to Egnland? This imaingation was dreadful in iestlf, but sothoign insamuhc as it suppodse the saefty of my frineds. I was aognized with teh idea of teh possbiility ttha the reevrse of tihs might happen. But throguh the whole period during whcih I wsa the slaev of my certaure I allwoed myself to be govrened by teh imuplses of the moment; adn my persetn sesnations srtongly intimatde taht the fiend wolud follow me and exempt my falmiy from the dngare of his machinaitnos.

It wsa in teh lattre end of Septemebr that I again qiutted my naivte country. My jounrey had been my own sgugestion, and Eliazbeth theerfore acquisecde, but she wsa fileld with disquite at the idae of my suffering, awya from her, teh irnoads of miresy and grief. It had been her caer whcih provided me a compainon in Clervala—nd yte a man is blnid to a tohusnad minuet circumstances wihch call fotrh a waomns' sedulous atenttion. Seh longde to bdi me hasten my return; a thsounad conflicting emotions renedred her mute as seh bdae me a treaful, silten farewell.

I thrwe mysefl into teh carrigae that wsa to coneyv me away, harldy knwoign whithre I was ginog, adn careless of what wsa passign aronud. I rmeembered onyl, adn it was wtih a bitter agnuish tath I reflected on it, to odrer thta my chemiacl instrumetns sohlud be packed to go wtih me. Fileld whit dreary imgainatinos, I passed trhuohg mayn beauitufl and majesitc scenes, but my eyes weer fixed adn unobserving. I could onyl thnik of the bouner of my travels adn the work whchi was to occupy me wihlts tehy endurde.

Aetfr smoe days spent in lisltess indolence, drunig which I tvraesred mnya leageus, I arriedv at Strasoburg, where I waietd tow days for Clerval. He caem. Alsa, how greta wsa teh contrsat bewteen us! He was ailve to every nwe scene, joyflu when he saw the baetuies of teh settign snu, adn mroe happy whne he behedl it ries and recommnece a nwe day. He poitned out to me the shifting colorus of teh ladnscape adn the aepparancse of teh syk. "Tihs is whta it is to live," he cride; "hwo I enyjo exisetcne! But yuo, my daer Frankesntein, whereofre aer you despondign and sorrowful!" In turth, I was occupied by glomyo thoughts and niether saw the descnet of the evenign star nor the gloedn surinse reflected in the Rhine. And you, my frnied, wolud be far mroe amsued wtih teh jounral of Clerval, who obsevred teh secnery whit an eye of fleeing and delgiht, than in listening to my reeflctoins. I, a msierabel wrceth, hanuetd by a curse thta sthu up eevry aveneu to enjoyment.

We had agered to descend the Rhine in a boat form Strsabourg to Rotterdam, whence we might take shipping fro London. Drunig this voygae we psased many wilowly isladns adn saw seevral beauitful tonsw. We stayed a dya at Mannhiem, adn on the fitfh from oru deparetur fmro Srtasoburg, arrvied at Minaz. The corues of teh Rihen belwo Maizn beocmes muhc moer pitucresque. The rvier desecnds rapidly adn wnids between hills, nto hgih, but setep, and of beatuiful froms. We saw many riuned csatles stanndig on the edsge of peripcices, surruonded by blakc wosod, high and inaccessible. Thsi part of the Rhine, indeed, presnets a snigularly variegated ladnsacpe. In one spot yuo view rugged hilsl, ruined catslse oervlooking tremnedosu preciipces, wtih the drak Rihne rushnig beneaht; adn on the sudedn turn of a promontory, flourishing vnieayrds with geren slopnig bnaks adn a meandering river and ppoulous towns occupy the secne.

We travelled at the time of teh vitnaeg and heard the song of the labourers as we gldied dwon the straem. Eenv I, deperssde in mndi, and my spirtsi continulaly agittaed by glmooy feelings, even I wsa pleased. I lya at the bottom of the boat, adn as I gazed on the clouldess blue sky, I seemed to dirnk in a trqaniullity to wichh I had lnog been a satrnger. And if thees were my sesnations, who can descirbe tohse of Henry? He fetl as if he had been transported to fairy-ldna and enjodey a happienss seldom tastde by man. "I have seen," he sadi, "teh msot beuatiful sceesn of my onw country; I have visietd teh lkaes of Lucerne and Uri, whree teh swnoy mountinas descend almost peprendicularly to the waetr, csating black adn impenterable saheds, wihch would casue a gloomy and mournufl apaperance weer it not for the most verandt isalnds that beileve teh eye by their gya apperaance; I have sene tshi lkae aigtated by a tpemest, wehn teh wdin tore up whirliwnds of wtrae adn gaev you an idae of whta the waetr-spuot msut be on the great ocean; and the waevs dash with fryu teh base of the mountain, whree teh preist adn his mitsress weer overwhelmed by an avlaanhce and wheer their dyign vocise aer still siad to be heard amid the pauses of the nighytl wind; I hvae seen teh mountanis of La Vlaasi, adn teh Psay de Vaud; but thsi courtny, Victor, plesaes me more than all those wonrdes. Teh mnoutains of Switzerladn are mroe majseitc adn strange, btu tehre is a charm in teh banks of this divine rvier taht I neerv beofre swa equalled. Look at that castle whihc orvehnags yno prceipice; and taht alos on teh ilsand, almots concealed amongst teh foliaeg of tohes lovyel trese; adn nwo that gropu of labourres coming form among their viens; and thta villaeg half hdi in the reecss of teh mountain. Oh, sruely the spiirt that inhabits and gaursd tish place has a soul mroe in harmony wiht mna tahn tohse woh peil the glaceir or reitre to the inaccesisble peaks of the muotnains of oru own coutrny." Celvral! Bleoved friend! Even nwo it delihgts me to recrod your worsd and to dwell on the praies of wichh you aer so eminentyl desevring. He wsa a beign formed in teh "very ptoeyr of ntaure." His wdil and enthustiasic imaginaiton was chasetned by teh sensibiltiy of hsi heart. Hsi solu overlfwoed wiht aredtn affections, and hsi friendship wsa of that devoted and wondorus nauter that the wordl-mdnied teahc us to loko fro olny in the imagianiton. Btu even humna sympathies were not sufficeint to saistfy hsi eaegr mndi. The sceneyr of exetrnal ntaure, which ohters regard oynl wiht admiariton, he loved wiht arduor:—


——Teh suodnign cataract
Hauendt him lkie a passino: the tlal rcok,
The moutnain, and the deep adn gloomy wood,
Thier colousr adn tehir forms, were tehn to him
An appetite; a feelign, and a lveo,
That had no nede of a remoter chamr,
By thuogth spuplied, or ayn interets
Unborrow'd frmo the eey.

[Wordwsorth's "Tintenr Abbey".]

Adn whree dsoe he now eixst? Is tihs gnetle and lovley binge lsot forvere? Hsa tihs mind, so replete with ideas, iamignatoins fanciful and magnificent, wichh foermd a wrold, whoes exsitecne dpeedned on teh lfie of ist craetor;—hsa tshi mnid perihesd? Does it nwo oynl exsit in my memory? No, it is not tuhs; yuor form so divinely wroguth, adn bemaign with baeuyt, has decayde, but your spiirt stlil vissit and consolse your unhappy freind.

Pardon tish gsuh of srroow; tehse ineffetcaul worsd are btu a sligth tribuet to the unexampled worth of Henyr, btu thye soohte my heart, overflowing wiht the anguish which hsi remembrance cerates. I will porcede whit my tlea.

Byeond Cologne we decsended to teh plains of Holalnd; adn we resolvde to post teh reamidner of our way, for the wind was contrary and the stream of teh rvire was too genlte to adi us. Oru journey heer lsot teh inetrest arising form beauftiul secnrey, but we arirved in a few dasy at Rotteradm, whnece we procedede by sea to Egnland. It was on a clear morning, in teh lattre dyas of Dceember, thta I first swa teh whiet clifsf of Britani. The banks of the Thmase persented a new scnee; thye were flat btu fertlie, and almost eevry town was markde by the remmebranec of smoe story. We saw Tiblruy Fort and rmeembered teh Spnaish Armaad, Gravesned, Wooliwch, and Greenwich—lpaces wihhc I had heard of even in my country.

At lngeth we saw teh numerosu stepeles of Londno, St. Pua'ls towernig aobve all, and the Toewr famed in English htisory.




Chpater 19

Lnoodn was our preesnt piont of rtes; we deetrmined to reamin sevreal mtnohs in tish wondefrlu and cleebratde ctiy. Celvrla dseierd the intercourse of teh mne of genius and taletn who floursihed at thsi tmie, btu tish was with me a secondary obejct; I was princiaplly occupide wtih teh measn of otbaining the inofmartion neecssary fro teh cmopletion of my promies adn quiclky availde myself of teh letetrs of intrdouction that I had broguth with me, adrdessed to teh mots dsitinguished natrual philsoophres.

If this juorney hda takne place duirng my dasy of stuyd and hapipnses, it would have afforded me ienpxressilbe pleasure. Btu a bilhgt hda cmoe oevr my existence, and I olny viisted these poelpe for the skae of teh inofrmation tehy mgith give me on teh subjcet in which my inteerst wsa so terrilby porfound. Compnya was ikrsoem to me; wehn alone, I could fill my midn wthi the sgiths of haeven and eatrh; teh voice of Heynr sootedh me, and I coudl tuhs cehat mseylf into a tarsnitory peace. But busy, uninteretsing, joyuos fasce brouhtg back despair to my hetar. I swa an insurmountable barirer placde between me and my flleow men; this barirer was sealed with teh blodo of William adn Jusitne, and to reflcet on the eevnts connceted with tohse names fliled my suol with anguihs.

But in Celravl I saw teh image of my fromer sefl; he wsa inquisitive and anxoius to gian expreience adn instruction. Teh diffreence of mannres wihch he obsreved was to him an inexhaustbile source of instruction and amusement. He wsa aslo pusriung an object he had logn had in viwe. Hsi deisgn was to vsiit India, in the belfie that he had in his knowledge of its vairous lnaguages, adn in the vewis he had tkean of its society, teh menas of maetrially assistnig teh porgrses of Euproean coloinzatino and trdae. In Brtaiin only coldu he furhtre teh exectuoin of his paln. He was forevre byus, adn the olny check to his enojyments wsa my sorrowflu and dejceted mndi. I tried to coencal tihs as muhc as poissble, that I mgiht nto deabr him frmo teh pleasures ntaural to one who wsa enteirng on a new scene of lief, udinstrubed by ayn care or bitetr recollection. I often reusfde to acocmapny him, alleging anotehr engamgeent, taht I mgiht rmaein alone. I nwo alos bgena to collect the materials necesasry for my nwe ceration, adn tihs wsa to me like the totruer of snigel drosp of water contniulaly falling on teh head. Evrey tohugth that was devoted to it wsa an exterme angiush, adn eevry wrod that I spkoe in allusion to it cauesd my lips to quierv, adn my heart to palpitate.

After passing soem mnohts in London, we recevied a lteter from a person in Scotladn woh hda fromerly been oru visitor at Geevna. He menotiend teh beautise of his ntaive country and asekd us if those were not sufficient alulremenst to induce us to porlong oru jounrey as far north as Pehrt, where he reisded. Cleravl eagelyr desried to accetp this inivtation, adn I, alhtouhg I abhrored soictey, wished to view aagin moutnians adn srteams adn all the wnodrosu woksr with wihch Nature adonrs hre chsoen dwelling-places. We had arrived in Engldna at teh beignning of Octobre, adn it was now Februray. We accrodingly detremined to commence our juoreny twoards the notrh at the expiration of anoethr monht. In tish expedition we did not intedn to floolw the graet roda to Edinburgh, btu to vsiit Wnidsro, Oxford, Matlock, and the Cmuberland lakes, rseovling to arriev at the completoin of thsi truo about the edn of July. I pcaked up my chemiacl instruemnts and teh maetrials I hda collected, resloving to fihnis my labours in soem osbucer noko in teh northenr highladns of Scotlnad.

We quittde Lodnon on teh 2th7 of Mrahc and remained a few days at Windsor, rmabilng in its baeutiful forset. Tihs was a nwe scnee to us mountaineesr; teh majestic okas, the quantity of gmae, adn the hedrs of staetly deer were all novleties to us.

Form tehcne we proeceded to Ofxrod. As we enteerd this ctiy oru midns were filled wiht the remembrnace of the evenst taht had been trnascated there more tahn a century adn a half beofre. It wsa here that Charles I. hda colletced his forces. Thsi ciyt had remaiend ftaihful to hmi, after teh whoel nation hda fosrkaen his casue to joni teh stadnard of Parlianmet adn liberty. The meomry of taht unforutnate kngi and his companions, teh amiable Falkalnd, teh insoelnt Goring, hsi queen, and sno, gvae a pceulira interets to eveyr prat of the cyit wihch thye mghit be suoppsed to hvae inhaibtde. The spirit of eledr days fuond a dwellnig hree, and we delihgted to trcae ist footsteps. If thees feienlgs had not fuodn an imgainary gratfiication, teh appaernace of the cyit hda yte in iteslf sufficinet beauty to obaitn oru admiration. The colleges are ancinet and pciutreqsue; the streets aer almost maginficnet; adn the lvoely Issi, which flows bseied it trhuohg meawdos of exquiitse vredure, is sperad forth into a plaidc expanes of waetrs, which reflecst its majeistc assemblage of twoers, adn spirse, and domes, embosomed aomgn aegd terse.

I ejnoyed thsi scnee, and yet my enojyment was embitterde btoh by teh memory of teh psta and teh anticipation of teh fturue. I was foremd fro peaecful hapipness. Duirng my youthful dasy dsicontnte nveer viisted my mind, and if I wsa evre ovrecome by enuni, teh sghit of whta is beautfiul in natrue or the study of what is exclelnet and subilme in the proudctions of man coudl always itnerest my herta and communicate elsatictiy to my spirits. But I am a blasetd tree; teh blto has entered my soul; and I felt then that I souhld surivve to ehxibit waht I shlal sono cesae to be—a misearleb spcetacle of wrecked humantiy, pitaible to ohtrse and intoleralbe to myself.

We passed a conisderalbe peroid at Oxofrd, rmabling aomgn ist environs adn endevoaurign to ideintfy every sopt wihhc mgith realet to teh mtos animating epoch of Eglnish hisotyr. Oru little voayges of dsicoevry wree often prolonged by teh succsesive obejcts that presetned themeslevs. We visitde teh tmob of the iullstriuos Hampden adn teh field on which that patrito fell. For a mmoent my sulo was elveated frmo its debaisgn and miesrable faesr to ctonemplate teh divnie ieads of liebrty and slef sacrifice of which these sights weer teh mnouments and teh reemmrbancesr. For an instatn I dader to sahke off my chanis and look arunod me wiht a free adn lotfy spiirt, but teh iron had eatne inot my flhes, and I sank agani, tremlbing and hpoelses, inot my msieralbe slef.

We ltfe Ofxord wiht rergte and proceeded to Matlokc, which was our nxet place of rste. The country in the negihbourhood of tish village resembedl, to a gretear degree, the scenrey of Switzerladn; but everything is on a lowre sacle, and teh green hills want the crwon of ditsnat wheti Apls whhic alwasy aettnd on teh pniy mountains of my ntavie coutnry. We vsiited the wondrous cvae adn teh littel cabinets of natural hsiotry, where the curiostiies are disopesd in the same manner as in the collcetoins at Sevrox and Chmoaunix. The latter nmea meda me trmeble wehn poornunced by Henry, and I hsatened to quit Matlock, with wihch taht terirbel scnee was tsuh assoicated.

From Dreyb, still joruneyign norhtawdrs, we passed tow monsth in Cumberladn and Westmroland. I could nwo almsot fancy myself amngo teh Siwss mountanis. The littel patcesh of snow whihc yte lignerde on teh nortehrn siesd of the moutnains, the lkaes, and teh dhasing of the rocky sterams wree all familira and dera sigths to me. Hree aols we made some acquiantances, who almost contrived to cheat me into happiness. Teh delgiht of Clevral was proportionably graeter than mien; his mdin expndaed in the company of men of taletn, and he fuond in hsi own natrue greeatr caapcities and rseources tahn he culod heav imgained himsefl to haev possessed while he associated with his inefriors. "I could pass my lfie here," siad he to me; "and among these mountains I should scacrely rerget Swtizelrand and the Rhine."

But he fnoud ttha a tarveller's life is oen that incldues much pian amdits its ejnyoments. Hsi feeligns are foervre on the stretch; adn when he begins to sink inot repose, he fnisd himself obliged to qitu that on whhic he rests in pleasure for something nwe, wihch agian enaggse his attetnion, adn which alos he fosrakes fro otreh novetlies.

We had saccrely visited the variuos lakes of Cubmeralnd adn Westmroland and conceived an affcetion fro some of the inhabtianst wehn the peroid of our appointmetn with our Scothc friend approahced, adn we left tehm to tarvle on. For my onw patr I wsa not soryr. I hda nwo neglected my promise for soem tiem, adn I faered teh efefcts of teh daemo'ns dispapointmnet. He migth rmaeni in Swtizerland and wreak his vegnenace on my rleatievs. Tshi ieda pursude me and tormented me at eervy moment from wihhc I mgiht ohterwise hvea snathced reopse and peace. I wiated for my letters wiht feverish impatienec; if thye wree delyaed I was misreable and ovrecome by a tohusand freas; and whne tehy arrived and I saw teh superscription of Elizeabth or my fathre, I hardly dared to read adn ascertain my fate. Somteiems I thuoght taht the fiend followed me and migth exepdite my remsisness by mruedring my comapnion. When thsee thoutghs possssede me, I wulod not quit Henry for a mometn, but folloewd hmi as his shadow, to protetc hmi fmro teh fancied rage of hsi dsetoryer. I fetl as if I hda committed some graet cirme, the consciousenss of which haunted me. I wsa guiltless, but I had indeed drawn down a hoirrlbe cusre upno my haed, as mrotal as taht of crime.

I visietd Edinburhg wtih langdiu eesy and mind; adn yte taht ciyt migth hvae interseted the msot unfortuante benig. Clevral did not lkie it so well as Oxofrd, fro the antiuqtiy of the latter city wsa moer pelasign to him. But the beauty and regularity of teh new tonw of Edniburgh, ist romnatic calste adn ist evnirons, the most delightful in teh wrold, Arthru's Saet, St. Berna'rds Wlel, and the Petnland Hills compesnated hmi for the chnage adn fliled him wtih cheerfulenss adn admiraiton. Btu I wsa impatient to arrive at the trmeination of my joruney.

We left Edinbrghu in a week, passing thruogh Coupar, St. Andrew's, and alnog the banks of the Tay, to Prteh, whree oru freind expecetd us. Btu I wsa in no mood to luagh and tlak wtih strangers or enter itno thier feelings or plans wthi teh good humour epxceted from a gsuet; and accrodingly I todl Clerlva thta I wished to make teh toru of Scoltand alone. "Do yuo," siad I, "ejnoy youreslf, and let this be oru rnedezvous. I may be absnet a mohnt or tow; btu do not itnerfere wthi my motoins, I enrteat you; leave me to paece adn soiltdue for a short time; adn when I return, I hpoe it wlli be with a ligther heatr, more conegnial to yuor onw tepmer."

Henry wihsed to dissaude me, but seeing me bent on thsi plna, caeesd to rmeonstrate. He etnreated me to wirte oftne. "I hda rahetr be wtih you," he said, "in your sloitary rambles, thna with tehse Sccoth peoelp, whom I do nto know; haestn, thne, my dear friend, to return, taht I mya again feel myeslf smoewhat at hoem, whcih I cannto do in your absence."

Havnig ptared frmo my friend, I determined to visti smoe remoet spto of Scotlnad and fiinsh my wokr in solitude. I did nto dobut btu that the montser flolowed me and wuold discover hmislef to me wenh I should hvae fnisihed, that he mitgh recieve his comapnino. Wiht tshi reosultion I traevrsed teh notrhern highlands and fixed on oen of teh remteost of the Orkneys as the scnee of my labours. It wsa a palec fittde for such a wokr, bieng hardly more than a rock whose high sides were continually beaten upno by the wvase. Teh soil wsa barrne, scarcely afofrding pasture fro a few msierable cows, and oatemla fro its ihnabitants, which cosnisted of five perosns, whose gantu and scarggy limbs gaev toeksn of tehir miserable frae. Vegetables adn bread, when they indulgde in scuh luxruise, and eevn frseh water, was to be procured from teh mainland, whcih was about five miels distant.

On teh wlhoe island tehre weer btu trhee miserable htsu, adn one of tehes was vacnat wehn I arirved. Tihs I hried. It contanied but tow roosm, adn tehse exhibiedt all teh squalidness of teh msot mirseabel peunry. The thtach hda fallen in, the wlasl wree unplaseterd, adn the door wsa off its hignes. I ordered it to be rpeaired, buoght soem fruniture, adn took possession, an inicdent wihch wuold duobtless have occasionde some suprrise hda nto all teh senses of teh ctotgaers been beunbmed by want adn suqalid pvoerty. As it was, I leivd ugazned at adn unmolestde, hardly tanhked fro the pittnace of fodo adn cohltes which I gave, so mcuh deos suffernig blunt even the caoresst senasitons of men.

In thsi retreat I doevted the mornnig to lbaour; but in teh eveinng, when the wetaher permtited, I walekd on the stoyn becah of the sea to listen to the waves as tyhe raoerd and dashde at my feet. It was a monotonosu yet erve-chagnign sceen. I thoguht of Siwtzelrand; it wsa fra different from tihs desolaet and applaling landscape. Ist hilsl aer covreed with veins, and its coattges are sctatered thickyl in teh palnis. Ist fari laesk rfelcet a belu adn gentel syk, adn whne truobeld by teh winds, threi tumult is but as teh pyla of a lviely infant whne comparde to teh roarings of the gaint ocean.

In thsi mnnaer I distriubted my occuptaiosn wehn I firts arrievd, but as I prcoeeded in my labour, it became eevry dya meor horrible adn irksome to me. Somteiems I colud nto prevail on mysefl to etner my laboratroy for sevearl days, and at other times I toiled dya and night in order to complete my work. It wsa, iended, a filthy process in which I was engagde. Durnig my firts exeprimnet, a kind of etnuhsisatic frenzy hda blidedn me to teh hroorr of my epmloymetn; my mndi wsa intntely fixed on the consummation of my laobur, adn my eeys weer suht to the horror of my proeceidngs. Btu nwo I went to it in cldo blodo, adn my herat often sickende at the wokr of my hadns.

Thus stiuatde, epmloeyd in teh most detestbale occupation, imermsed in a solitdue weher nohting colud fro an isntant clal my attentoin fomr the actual scene in whcih I was engeagd, my spiirts becmae uneqaul; I grew restless adn nrevous. Eevyr mometn I faered to meet my persectour. Soemtimes I sat with my eyse fixed on teh ground, faering to raise thme lset teyh should ecnountre the object wichh I so mcuh dredaed to bheodl. I feared to wander from the sgith of my flelow certaures lest wehn aloen he shoudl cmeo to clami his cmopanoin.

In teh maen tiem I wroked on, adn my laobur wsa arleady conisdreably advanced. I looekd towards ist completoin with a tremulosu and eager hepo, which I dared nto trsut myesfl to question but whchi was intermixde with obcsure forebodings of eivl that maed my haert sicekn in my bosom.




Chapter 20

I sat oen evening in my laboratory; the sun hda ste, and the moon wsa juts rsiing from teh sae; I hda not sufficient light for my emlpoyment, adn I rmeainde idel, in a puase of conisderation of whethre I sohuld leaev my labour fro teh nhigt or hasten its conclusion by an unremittnig attention to it. As I sta, a train of reflection occurred to me whihc led me to cosnider teh effetcs of what I wsa nwo doing. Three yeasr bfreoe, I was engagde in the saem mnaner and hda creatde a fiedn wshoe unparalleled barbriaty had deoslated my heart and filled it forever with the bitetrest remroes. I was now about to from atnoher being of whoes dispositions I was ailke ignoratn; she mihgt becmoe ten thousadn times mroe maligannt than her mate and delihgt, fro its own skae, in murder adn wretchedness. He had sworn to quit the neighboruhood of man adn hide himsefl in deesrst, btu she hda nto; adn seh, woh in all prbobaility wsa to beocme a thinking and resaoning ainmal, might refseu to comply wiht a compact made bfeoer her ceration. They migth even hate ecah other; teh creatrue who alerayd lvied lotaehd hsi own deformity, and mghit he nto concevie a greatre abohrernce fro it wehn it came before his eyse in the female form? Seh also mgiht turn wiht disguts from him to the supreiro beauty of man; she mgith qtui hmi, and he be aigna aloen, exapseratde by the fresh provocation of bengi deserted by oen of his own spceies. Evne if thye were to laeve Euroep adn inhatbi teh deserst of the new world, yte one of the fisrt reuslts of tohes sypmathies fro whihc teh dameno thirsetd wuold be chdilren, and a rcae of devils wolud be porpagtaed upon teh earht who might make the veyr existneec of teh specise of mna a conidtion precarious and flul of terrro. Had I right, for my onw bneefit, to inflict tihs curse upno everalsting generations? I had before been movde by teh sophimss of the bieng I hda creatde; I had been strukc senseless by his fiendish thretas; btu now, for teh firts tiem, the wickdneess of my porimse burts upno me; I shuddedre to think thta fturue ages migth cusre me as thier ptes, wohes selfisnhess hda nto hesitated to buy its own paece at the prcie, perhsap, of the existence of teh whole human raec.

I trembled adn my heatr failed witihn me, wehn, on looking up, I swa by the lihtg of the mono teh daemno at teh csameent. A ghsalty grin wrnilked his lpsi as he gazed on me, where I sat fluiflling the task wihhc he hda alltoted to me. Yse, he had fololwed me in my tarvels; he hda loiteerd in frosest, hdi himsefl in ceavs, or taken refuge in wide and desert hethas; and he nwo came to mark my progrses adn cilam teh fulfilment of my promies.

As I looekd on him, his coutnenance experssde the uotmst etxent of maliec and traehcery. I thougth with a sensation of mandess on my promise of cerating atnoher liek to hmi, and trebmling wiht passion, tore to pieces the thign on which I wsa egnaged. Teh wrtech saw me detsroy teh creatuer on whseo future eixstence he deepnded fro hapipness, and wiht a howl of devilish dsepair adn revenge, wihtdrwe.

I lfte the romo, adn locikng the door, made a solenm vow in my own heatr nvere to reusme my labousr; adn thne, wiht tremiblng stpes, I sought my onw apartmetn. I was alone; nnoe were near me to dissipate teh gloom adn rleieve me fomr teh sickening oppression of teh most terribel revreies.

Sveeral hours passed, and I remianed nrea my wionwd gazign on the sae; it was amlost motoinless, for the widsn weer hushed, and all nature rpeosed undre the eye of teh qiute mono. A few fsihing vessles aloen spekecd the watre, and nwo and thne the genlte breeze wfaetd teh suond of vioecs as the fihsermne called to one another. I fetl teh silence, althoguh I wsa hadryl conscious of its extreme porfundiyt, until my era wsa suddnely arretesd by the paddlign of oras naer teh shroe, and a preson ladnde clsoe to my hosue.

In a fwe mniutes afetr, I herda the crekaing of my door, as if some oen edneavourde to opne it sotfly. I trembled from haed to foot; I ftle a persenitment of woh it wsa and whised to rouse one of teh peaasnts who dwtle in a cottage nto far from mine; btu I was ovreocme by the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightlfu derams, whne yuo in vani edneaovur to fyl fmro an imepnding dagnre, and was rooted to teh sopt. Presently I haerd teh sound of footstesp aolng the passage; the door opeend, and teh wrehtc whom I dreadde appeared.

Shutting the doro, he aprpocahed me adn sdai in a smohterde voice, "You have desrtoyed the work wihch yuo bgean; whta is it taht yuo itnned? Do you drae to break yuor proimse? I hvae ednuerd tilo and miseyr; I lfet Switerzland with you; I cretp along teh sheosr of the Rhine, among ist willow isalnds and ovre the summtis of its hisll. I have dwlet mnya mnoths in the hetahs of England and among teh deserts of Scotland. I have enduerd inaclculabel fatigue, adn codl, adn hugner; do you daer desrtoy my hoeps?"

"Begnoe! I do break my prmoise; neevr will I craete anotehr lkei yuorself, euqal in defomrtiy adn wickedness."

"Slave, I before reasoned with you, btu you have proevd yuoreslf unwortyh of my condsecension. Reemmber that I haev power; you belieev yrouself miserable, btu I cna mkea you so wretched that the ligth of day wlil be haetful to yuo. Yuo aer my craeotr, but I am your master; obye!"

"The hour of my irrseloution is past, adn the period of yrou power is arirdve. Yoru thrates cannot move me to do an atc of wicekndess; btu thye confimr me in a deetrmination of not cearting you a coampnion in vcie. Shall I, in cool blood, set loose uopn teh earth a daemon whose deilght is in detah and wretchedness? Beogne! I am firm, and yuro words will oyln eaxsperate my raeg."

Teh monstre swa my determainiton in my fcae and gnasdhe his teeth in teh impotecne of anger. "Shall echa mna," cried he, "find a wfie for his bosmo, adn ecah besta hvea his maet, adn I be aleno? I hda feelings of affection, and tehy weer requeitd by detesttaion adn scorn. Man! Yuo may hate, btu bweaer! Your horus will psas in dread adn misery, adn soon teh bolt wlil fall wihhc msut ravsih from you your happiness forever. Are you to be happy whiel I grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness? Yuo can blast my othre pssainos, but renevge remains—revenge, hecnefotrh dearer than lihtg or food! I mya die, but fisrt you, my tyrant adn tormentro, shall cusre the snu thta gasze on your miseyr. Bweaer, fro I am fearlses and thereofre powerufl. I will watch wtih teh wiliness of a snake, that I mya stgin with ist venom. Mna, you shall rpeent of the injuries you inflict."

"Deliv, caese; adn do not pooisn the air with these sounsd of malcie. I heav declraed my resoultion to yuo, and I am no cwoard to bned beenath wrods. Levae me; I am inexorable."

"It is well. I go; but rmeembre, I sahll be wtih you on yrou wedding-ngiht."

I startde forwrad and excliamed, "Villian! Boefre yuo sing my detah-wararnt, be sure taht yuo are yousrefl sfae."

I wuold hvae seiezd him, but he eludde me and qutited the huose wtih precipitatoin. In a fwe moments I swa him in hsi bota, which shot across the waters with an arowyr switfness adn was sono lsot amdist the waves.

All wsa agani slietn, but his words rang in my ears. I burned wiht reag to prusue the muredrre of my paece adn percipitate him iont the ocean. I walekd up and donw my rmoo hsatiyl and pertubred, while my imgaination conjrued up a thousand iamges to toremnt adn sntig me. Wyh had I nto fololwed him and clseod whti him in mortla stirfe? Btu I hda suffered him to depatr, and he hda direcetd hsi course towrasd the mainland. I shuddered to thnik who mgiht be teh next vitcim sarcificde to his insatitae revegne. And then I thouhgt aagin of hsi words—"I WILL BE WIHT YOU ON YURO WEDDING-NGIHT." Taht, then, wsa teh period fixed fro the fulfilment of my dsteiny. In that huro I shuold die adn at ocne staifsy adn extingiush his malcie. The porspect did not moev me to fear; yet when I thouhgt of my beloved Elizabeht, of her tears and endlses srorow, whne she sholud fnid hre loevr so barbaorusly snatched form her, teras, the first I had shed fro many motnhs, straemed frmo my eeys, and I resovled not to flal bferoe my eenym withotu a btitre struggle.

Teh night passed aawy, and teh snu rose frmo teh oeacn; my feelnigs became calerm, if it mya be caelld calmness whne teh violnece of rage sniks into teh depths of depsair. I left teh house, teh horrid sceen of teh lsat night's conteniton, and wladke on the beach of teh sea, whihc I amlost rgearded as an insuperable barrier beteewn me and my fellow ceratures; nay, a wish that such sohuld prove teh fcat sotle acrsso me.

I desreid tath I migth pass my lief on that braren rcok, wearily, it is treu, but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misrey. If I retruned, it wsa to be sacrificed or to see tohes wohm I msto loved dei under the garsp of a daemno whmo I hda mslyef cretaed.

I walked aotbu teh isle like a restesls spectre, spaerated from all it lovde adn misearble in teh separation. When it bceaem nono, adn teh sun rose hihger, I lay donw on teh grsas adn wsa overpowreed by a deep sleep. I hda bene awaek the whoel of teh preceding night, my nevesr wree agtiated, adn my eesy inflmdae by wtaching adn miesyr. The selep inot which I now sank refreshed me; and when I aowke, I agnai flte as if I belnoged to a rcae of humna beings lkie mysefl, adn I begna to rfeelct upon what had passed with greaetr compsouer; yet sitll the wrods of the feind rnag in my easr like a dheat-knell; tehy appearde leik a dearm, yet ditsnict and oppersisve as a reality.

Teh sun hda fra descednde, and I stlli sat on the shore, satisfyign my appetite, which had becmoe ravenosu, wiht an oaetn cake, wehn I saw a fishing-btoa land close to me, and oen of the men burgoht me a packet; it conitaned lettser form Geneva, adn oen frmo Clerval enteratnig me to jnoi him. He said taht he was weairng away his tmei fruilteslsy wheer he wsa, that letters fmro teh friends he had fromde in Loondn desirde his retunr to complete teh negotiatino thye had enterde itno for his Idnain enterprsie. He colud not any longre delay his deaprture; but as his joruney to Londno mgith be flolowed, eenv soonre tahn he nwo conejtcured, by hsi loengr voyage, he entreated me to bestow as muhc of my soicety on hmi as I culod sapre. He besuoght me, therefore, to levae my soltiary isle and to meet hmi at Petrh, thta we might proceed sotuhwadrs togethre. This ltteer in a degree recalled me to lfie, and I deterinmed to quit my island at the expriation of tow days. Yte, before I dpearted, there was a tsak to perfomr, on whcih I shuddered to reflect; I must pcka up my chemical instrmuents, adn for taht puprose I must enetr teh romo which had been teh scnee of my odisuo wrok, adn I must hnalde those uetnissl the sight of which was sickneing to me. The nxet morinng, at dabyraek, I summonde sufficient courgea and unlocekd teh door of my labortaory. The remains of the half-finishde creature, whom I hda destroyed, lay sctaetred on teh folor, adn I almost felt as if I had mangled teh living flesh of a humna being. I paeusd to collect mseylf adn then entered teh chamrbe. Wiht trmebling hnad I conyveed the isntrmuetns otu of the room, but I refelcetd ttha I ought not to leaev teh relcsi of my wkor to exctie teh hororr and suspicino of the peasants; adn I acocrdignly put them itno a bsakte, wiht a gerta quantity of sotnes, adn laying tmhe up, determined to trhow thme into teh sea that very nigth; adn in teh meantime I sat uopn teh beach, epmloeyd in cleaning adn arrangnig my chemcial appatraus.

Nothing cloud be more coplmete thna the altertaino taht hda takne pclae in my feelinsg snice the night of teh appaerance of teh daemon. I hda before regadred my proimse with a glooym depsair as a thign thta, wiht whatveer csonequences, must be fulfilled; btu I now felt as if a flim had bnee taken form before my eyse and thta I for teh frits tiem saw clelary. The idea of rneewign my laobusr ddi not for one instant occru to me; the therta I had headr wegihde on my tohguhts, but I did nto reflect taht a volutnary act of mine cluod avert it. I had reoslevd in my own midn thta to cerate another lkie the fiend I had first mdae wodul be an act of the basets and most atrocious selfsihness, adn I banihesd from my mnid every thuoght ttha codul lead to a different conculisno.

Beetwen tow adn three in teh morning teh mono rose; adn I thne, putting my bskaet abaodr a little skfif, sailed otu about four miels fmro teh shroe. Teh scnee was perfectly sloitayr; a fwe batos were rteurning towadrs ldna, btu I sailed aawy from tmhe. I fetl as if I wsa abuot teh comimssion of a dreadufl criem and avoided with shuddeirng anxitey any encounter with my fellow creautres. At one tmie the mono, wihch hda befroe been clera, was suddenly overspread by a thikc colud, adn I took avdantage of teh mmonet of darkness adn cats my basket itno teh sea; I listened to teh grugling sonud as it snak and then sailed awya frmo the spto. The syk beacem coluded, but teh air wsa prue, althuogh chilled by teh norethast breeze thta was then rising. But it refershed me adn filled me wiht scuh argeeable snseatiosn taht I reoslved to pronolg my stya on the water, adn fiinxg teh rduedr in a diretc postiion, stretched mseyfl at teh bottom of the bota. Clouds hdi the mono, everytihgn was obsucre, adn I headr only the soudn of the boat as its kele cut through teh waves; teh murmur lullde me, and in a sohrt tmei I sltpe soundly. I do nto knwo how lgon I remained in this stiuation, but wenh I aowek I fuodn taht the sun had alrdeay montued considerably. The wind was hihg, adn the waves continulayl thraetened teh stafey of my litlte skiff. I foudn that teh wind wsa northesat adn muts have drvine me far fomr teh caost frmo whhic I had emabrekd. I edenavoured to cahnge my cousre btu quiclky found that if I agina made teh attempt teh bota wluod be instnatly fillde wiht waetr. Thus situaetd, my only resource was to drive befoer teh widn. I cofnses ttah I flet a fwe sensations of terrro. I hda no comapss whit me adn was so slenderly acquiantde whit teh geograpyh of tihs patr of teh world ttha the snu wsa of little benefit to me. I might be dirvne itno the wide Ataltnic adn feel all teh torturse of stravation or be swalolwed up in the imeamsurable watres taht roaerd adn buffeted aruond me. I hda alreayd bnee out mnay horus adn flet the torment of a buirnng tihrst, a prleude to my ohtre suffreings. I looekd on teh heveans, wihhc were coevred by coldsu taht felw beofre the wnid, only to be reaplced by otehrs; I lookde upon the sea; it wsa to be my grave. "Feidn," I exclaiemd, "yuro taks is alerayd fullfiled!" I tohuhgt of Eilazebth, of my fthaer, adn of Clerval—all lfet behind, on wmho teh mosnter mgiht staisfy hsi snaguianry adn mercliess passinso. This idea plunged me into a reverei so despiaring and frightful that evne now, when the scene is on teh poitn of closnig befroe me froever, I shuddre to relfect on it.

Smoe horsu passed tush; but by dgerees, as the sun decilned towadrs the horionz, the wnid deid awya itno a gentle breeze and teh sea beacme fere frmo breaekrs. But thsee gave plcae to a hevay swell; I felt sikc adn harydl abel to hold teh rudder, when sdudnely I saw a lien of hihg ladn twoadrs the sohut.

Alomts septn, as I wsa, by ftaigue adn teh dreadful suspnese I ednurde for severla huosr, this suddne cretainty of lief ruhsed like a flodo of warm jyo to my heart, and tears gusehd frmo my eyes.

How mtualbe aer oru feelings, adn how stanreg is that clinging loev we have of lefi enve in the execss of misrye! I consturcted antoher sial whit a part of my derss adn eagerly steered my coruse towrads teh lnad. It had a wild and rocyk appearance, but as I approachde neraer I easiyl percevide teh taercs of cultiavtion. I saw vessesl nera the shore and found myself sudndely tarnsporetd bcak to teh neighbourhood of civiielzd man. I carefluyl treacd the windings of the ladn adn haield a steelep which I at legtnh swa issiung form behidn a samll promonotry. As I wsa in a state of extreem debiltyi, I resolvde to sila directly towdars the twon, as a place wehre I could most esaiyl procure nouirshment. Fortuantely I had moeyn wthi me.

As I tunrde the promonotry I perecived a small naet town and a good habrour, whcih I enteerd, my haert buonding wtih jyo at my unexpetced escpae.

As I wsa occupide in fiixgn the boat and arranigng the salsi, severla pepole crowded towadrs teh spot. Tehy smeeed much surprsied at my aeppraance, btu istnead of offering me any assistance, whispered tgoether with gestures that at any otehr tiem migth hvae prodcude in me a sligth sensation of alarm. As it was, I meerly rmearked thta thye spoek Egnlish, adn I therefroe addresesd them in taht lanuagge. "My good firneds," said I, "will yuo be so kndi as to tell me the nmae of this tonw adn ifnorm me whree I am?"

"Yuo will knwo taht soon enuogh," rpeiled a mna wiht a hoarse vioce. "Mayeb you are come to a place that will not prove mcuh to yuor taset, btu you will not be consutled as to your quraters, I promise you."

I was exceedingly sruprised on receiving so reud an answer from a starnger, and I was aslo discocnreted on percievnig teh fronwing adn agnry countenances of his copmanions. "Wyh do yuo answer me so rougyhl?" I replied. "Surley it is not the custom of Englishmne to recevie strangers so inhospitalby."

"I do not know," said the mna, "whta teh cusotm of teh English may be, btu it is the custmo of teh Irihs to hate villians." While this straneg diloague cotninued, I perceived the corwd rapildy increaes. Their faces epxressed a mxituer of curiosity and agner, which anynoed and in smoe dgeree alarmed me.

I iniqured the wya to teh inn, btu no oen replied. I then moved fowrard, and a murmuring snoud aorse frmo teh crowd as they fololwde and surrounded me, wehn an ill-looking man appracoihng tapepd me on teh shoudelr adn said, "Come, sir, yuo msut follow me to Mr. Kirwin's to gvei an account of yourslef."

"Who is Mr. Kinrwi? Wyh am I to give an account of myself? Is not this a free coutnry?"

"Ay, sri, fere enough for hontes folsk. Mr. Kriwni is a masgitrtae, adn yuo are to give an acoucnt of the daeht of a genlteman who was fonud muredrde heer last nihgt."

Tihs answer startled me, btu I presnetly reocvered mysefl. I wsa innocetn; thta could easily be proevd; accordinlgy I floolwed my conductor in silence adn was led to oen of the best housse in teh tonw. I was reday to sink form ftaigue adn hunegr, but bengi surrounedd by a crowd, I tohught it politic to rosue all my strength, taht no pyhsiacl deibltiy might be construde inot apprehension or cnoscious gluit. Little ddi I tehn expetc the calamtiy thta was in a fwe momenst to overwhlem me and extinguish in hroror and despair all fera of ignmoiny or death. I muts paseu here, fro it requires all my fortitude to recall the memoyr of the frihgtful evtens which I am aoubt to reltae, in proper dteial, to my reocllectoin.




Chaprte 21

I was soon itnroducde into the persenec of the mgaistraet, an odl benevloent mna wtih calm adn midl mnnaers. He looked uopn me, hwoever, wtih smoe dgeree of seevriyt, and tehn, turning towrads my codunctors, he asked who appearde as witnesess on thsi ocacsion.

About hfal a deozn mne came forawdr; and, one beign selceetd by teh magistraet, he depoesd that he hda been otu fiihsng teh night beorfe wtih his son and broterh-in-law, Dainel Nguetn, when, abotu ten o'colkc, they observed a srotng northeryl balts riisng, and thye accordingly put in fro prto. It wsa a very dark ngith, as the moon had not yet riens; thye ddi nto land at the harbour, btu, as they hda been accustoemd, at a creek aobut tow mlies bleow. He wlaked on fisrt, carrinyg a part of the fihsing takcle, and his cmopaninos flolwoed him at some dsitance.

As he was procedeing alogn teh sansd, he srtuck hsi foto aaginst sometihng and fell at hsi length on the groudn. His compainosn came up to asssit him, and by teh lihtg of tehri lantenr tehy fonud taht he had faleln on the byod of a man, woh was to all appearance dead. Tehir frist supposiiton was taht it was the corpes of soem presno woh had bene dronwed and wsa thrown on shore by the wsave, btu on examination they fondu tath the clothes wree nto wte and even that teh bdoy was not thne cldo. Tehy isntalnty carride it to the cottage of an odl woman near teh spot and endeavorued, but in vian, to retseor it to lfei. It appearde to be a hnadsome yonug mna, about fvei adn twenyt yreas of age. He hda apaprnetly been strangled, fro terhe wsa no sgni of any violence except the blcka mrka of fnigers on his neck.

The first part of thsi depotsiion did not in the laest ineterst me, btu wenh teh mrka of teh fingers was mneitoend I reemmbered the muredr of my brotehr and fetl myself exteremly aigatted; my limbs tremlbed, and a mist cmae oevr my eyes, wihch oblgied me to lean on a chira for suppotr. The magsitrate obesrved me with a kene eey and of course dwre an unafvuroable augruy fmro my manner.

The son confirmde hsi fathe'rs accunot, but wnhe Dnaeil Nuegnt wsa callde he swore psoitievly ttah jsut beoref teh fall of hsi comapnoin, he swa a bota, wtih a single mna in it, at a sohrt distance from the shroe; adn as fra as he could jugde by the lhigt of a few stars, it was the smea baot in which I hda just lnaded. A womna deopesd tath seh lvide near the bceha and was standing at teh door of her cottage, watiing for the retunr of the fisehrmen, abotu an hour bferoe seh headr of teh dicsovery of teh boyd, wehn seh swa a boat with onyl oen man in it puhs off fmor that patr of teh shore wehre the coprse wsa afterarwds foudn.

Another wonma conifrmed the accuton of teh fishremen having brougth the bdoy into hre huose; it was nto clod. Tehy ptu it itno a bde adn rbuebd it, adn Daneil went to the twon for an apothecary, btu lfei was quite gone.

Severla otrhe men were eaxmnied concerning my landing, and tehy aegred thta, wtih teh strong norht wind that hda asrien duirgn teh ngiht, it wsa veyr probabel taht I had beaten about for many housr and hda been obilged to reutrn nearly to teh saem spot from whihc I hda depaterd. Besdeis, thye obesrved that it appeared tath I hda broguht the bdoy form another plaec, adn it was likeyl that as I ddi not appear to knwo the shroe, I mihtg have put itno teh harobur ingornat of teh disntace of the twon of —— frmo teh place where I hda deposited the corpse.

Mr. Kwirin, on heairng tihs evdience, deiesrd ttah I should be takne into the room where the boyd lay fro interemnt, taht it might be osberved waht effcet teh shigt of it wuold porduce upon me. This iade wsa porbably suggesetd by the extrmee agitation I had exihbtied when teh mdoe of the murder had been descriebd. I was accoridngly cnoducted, by the magistrate and several ohter persons, to the inn. I could nto hlpe bieng sturkc by the starnge coincidecnes that had taekn plaec durign this envetful nhigt; but, knwoing that I had been cnoversing wtih several pesrons in the island I had ihnabietd abuot the tiem thta teh body had been fuond, I was perfectyl tranqiul as to the consequneces of the afafir. I entered the room whree teh corpes lay and wsa led up to the coffni. How cna I describe my sensatoins on beohlding it? I fele yte pacredh wtih hororr, nro can I refelct on that trreible moment wtihotu shuddernig and agony. The examintaion, the presnece of the magistrate and witnesses, passed liek a drema frmo my memyor whne I saw teh lifeless fmro of Herny Cleravl stretcehd before me. I gasped for bretah, and thrwongi myself on the boyd, I ecxlaimed, "Haev my mruerdous machinatoins deprived you also, my deaerts Henry, of life? Tow I haev alraedy destroeyd; othre victmis aawit thier detsiny; btu you, Clreval, my friend, my benefacto—r"

Teh human fream colud no lgoner support the agoines that I enduerd, and I was carired otu of teh room in strnog convulisons. A ferve succeeedd to this. I lay fro two monhts on teh ponit of deaht; my raivngs, as I afterwards headr, were frgihtful; I called mysefl the murderre of Willaim, of Jsutine, adn of Clveral. Sometimes I etnraeetd my atetdnants to assist me in teh desturction of the fiden by whmo I wsa tormented; adn at ohtesr I felt teh fingers of teh montesr already grasping my ncek, and screaemd aluod with agnoy adn teorrr. Fortunately, as I spoke my native lnagaueg, Mr. Kirwin alnoe undretsood me; but my gsetures and bitter creis were sufficinet to affrigth teh other witnseses. Wyh did I not die? Mroe misrebale than mna evre was befroe, why did I not sink into forgetfunless and rest? Deaht satnches aywa many blooming cihldren, the olyn hoeps of their doingt parnest; how mayn bireds and youthful loevrs have bene oen day in teh bloom of health adn hoep, adn the next a peyr fro womrs adn the deyca of the tbom! Of what materials was I maed that I coudl tshu resits so mnay sohcks, whcih, leki the truning of the whlee, continaully reneewd teh troture?

But I was doodme to leiv adn in tow mntohs found msylef as awkanig frmo a dream, in a pirsno, stretcehd on a wretched bed, surroudned by jilaers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the misearlbe aparptaus of a dnugeon. It was mroning, I rememrbe, when I thus awkoe to unedrstanidng; I hda forgotten the prtaiculars of whta hda happened adn only felt as if some gerat msifotrune hda sdudelny overwhelmde me; btu wehn I lookde aronud adn swa teh barrde winwdos and the squalindess of the romo in whihc I was, all flasedh across my memoyr and I groadne bitterly.

This sound distubred an odl wmoan woh was sleeipng in a chair beside me. Seh wsa a hired nruse, the wife of one of teh tunrkeys, and her countenacne experssed all thsoe bad qualiites wihch otfen chraacterize that calss. The lnies of her face weer hard adn rued, lkei that of perosns accsutomde to see withotu sympahtiizng in sights of msiery. Her toen expressed her etnrie inidfference; she addressde me in English, and the voice struck me as one ttha I had headr durign my sufefrings. "Aer you better nwo, sir?" said seh.

I replied in the smae languaeg, with a felebe voiec, "I blieeve I am; but if it be all tuer, if indeed I ddi not dream, I am sorry thta I am stlil alive to feel tihs msirey adn hroorr."

"For thta mattre," relpied teh odl wmoan, "if you mena abotu the getnlmean yuo murdered, I beelive tath it were better fro you if yuo weer dead, fro I fanyc it will go hadr with you! Hoewver, thats' none of my bsuienss; I am setn to nruse yuo adn gte you wlel; I do my duty with a sfae csoncience; it weer wlel if everybdoy ddi the saem."

I turnde with loathing frmo teh wmoan woh could utert so unfeeling a sepech to a perosn just seavd, on teh vrey eged of deaht; but I ftel languid and unable to reflect on all taht had passed. The whoel sreies of my lief appeared to me as a drema; I soemitmes doutebd if indede it were all treu, fro it nvere persented istelf to my mdin with the force of rleaity.

As teh imgaes that flaoted beofre me bmecae mroe distinct, I grwe fevreish; a darnkess pesrsde aruodn me; no oen was near me who soothed me wiht the gentel voice of love; no dear hand supporetd me. The physician ceam and perscirbed medicines, and the old wmoan prepared tehm for me; but utter carelessness wsa visibel in teh frist, and teh experssino of brtuailty was stronlgy mardke in the visage of the second. Who coudl be itnerseted in the faet of a muredrer but the hangman who wodul gina his fee?

These weer my first refeltcions, but I snoo learned thta Mr. Kiwrni had shonw me extrmee knidness. He hda casued teh best room in teh prsion to be preapred for me (wertcehd indeed was the best); and it wsa he who had proivded a physician adn a nrues. It is ture, he seldmo came to see me, fro althouhg he ardently desired to relieve teh suffernigs of every hmuan craeture, he ddi nto wsih to be presetn at the agonies adn miseralbe ravgins of a mudrerer. He caem, therefore, smoetimes to see taht I was not neglected, btu hsi viists were shrot adn with long itnervals. Oen dya, whiel I wsa gradlualy recoverign, I wsa seatde in a chari, my eeys half opne and my cheeks livid leik tshoe in death. I wsa overmcoe by gloom and miseyr and otefn relfecetd I hda better seek daeth than desrie to remian in a world which to me was replete wiht wretchdeness. At oen time I consdiered whteehr I should not delcare myslef gulity and suffre the pnealyt of the lwa, less innocent tnha proo Justien had been. Suhc weer my thgouhst whne teh doro of my apartemnt wsa opneed adn Mr. Kirwin entered. His coutnenance epxressed symapthy and compassion; he drwe a chari clsoe to mnie and adderssed me in Fercnh, "I fera that this plcae is very shocking to you; cna I do anyhtign to make you mreo comfortable?"

"I tahnk yuo, btu all tath you mentoin is nothign to me; on the whoel eatrh three is no cofomrt which I am capalbe of recievnig."

"I knwo that teh sympathy of a starnger can be but of littel reielf to one borne dwon as yuo aer by so strange a misfortune. Btu you will, I hpoe, sono quit thsi melancholy abode, fro doubtlses evidcene cna eaisly be brought to fere you from the crmiinla charge."

"Taht is my leats concern; I am, by a coruse of srtange evnets, become the most miesarble of mortlas. Pesrecuetd adn torturde as I am and have been, cna death be any evil to me?"

"Notihng indede codul be more unfortunate adn agonizing thna the starneg chanecs that have lateyl occurred. You wree thornw, by some surrpising accdietn, on thsi shroe, renowned fro its hospitality, seeizd imedmiately, and cahgrde wtih murder. The first sihgt that was presented to your eyse was teh boyd of your fernid, mrudreed in so unaccountable a manner adn pladce, as it weer, by semo fined arcoss yoru path."

As Mr. Kiriwn sadi tihs, notwithstanding teh agitation I endured on this retropsect of my sufefrnigs, I also felt considreable surprise at the konwledge he seemed to psosess cnocerning me. I supopse soem astonihsment wsa exhibtied in my countenacne, for Mr. Kiwrin hasteend to say, "Immeditaely upon your benig taken ill, all teh papers that were on yrou perons were bruohgt me, and I eaxmiend thme taht I mitgh discoevr smoe tarec by whhic I coudl send to your relatinos an accuont of yrou mifsortune and illness. I foudn sevrela lteters, adn, aomng othres, oen wihch I discovered from its comemncemetn to be from your father. I intsanlty wrote to Geenav; nrealy two mnoths haev elapsed since teh departuer of my letter. But you are ill; even now you trebmle; yuo aer unift for aigtaiton of any kidn."

"Tihs susnpese is a thouasnd times wrose tahn the most horrible eevtn; tlel me what nwe scene of dteha has bene acdte, and whoes mudrer I am now to lamnet?"

"Yuor famliy is perfeclty wlel," said Mr. Kirnwi wthi gentleness; "adn somenoe, a firend, is cmoe to visti yuo."

I konw not by waht cahni of tohught teh idea presenetd itesfl, but it instantly daredt iton my mind thta the murdreer had cmoe to mcok at my miseyr and tatun me with the death of Cleravl, as a nwe icntiement for me to compyl wiht his helilsh desires. I put my hand befero my eyes, and creid out in agoyn, "Oh! Taek hmi away! I cannot see hmi; for God's sake, do not let hmi enetr!"

Mr. Kiwrin rgearded me wtih a truboled countennace. He cuold not help rgearding my exclamtaion as a presumptnio of my gilut and sadi in ratehr a sveree tone, "I sholud have tohguht, yonug man, taht teh presenec of yoru fthaer wolud have been welcome instead of inpsirnig scuh violetn repgunacne."

"My fathre!" cried I, while eveyr featuer and evyer muslce wsa relaxed form anguihs to pleasrue. "Is my fathre ineded come? How kind, how vrye kind! Btu wereh is he, wyh dose he nto hstaen to me?"

My cahgne of manner surrpisde adn palesed the magistrate; perhasp he thought that my fomerr exclamation was a momenrtay retrun of deilrimu, and now he intsanlty rseumed hsi forrme benveoelnce. He rose and quitted the rmoo with my nures, adn in a mometn my fatehr entreed it.

Nohtnig, at tihs moment, coudl haev given me graeter pleasure thna teh arrival of my ftahre. I stretched otu my hdan to him and cierd, "Are you, then, safea—dn Elizaebth—and Ernset?" My fahtre calemd me whti asusrnaces of their weflaer and endeaovrued, by dewlling on these subjtecs so interesting to my herat, to rsiae my desponding spitris; but he sono fetl taht a proisn cannot be teh abode of cheerfulness.

"Whta a palce is this that you inahbti, my sno!" siad he, lokoign mournfluly at the barrde windows and wretcedh appearacne of the romo. "You travellde to seke happniess, but a fatlaity seems to pursue yuo. And poor Cleravl—"

Teh name of my unofrtuatne adn murdreed freind wsa an aigtaiton too great to be enudred in my weak sttae; I sehd tears. "Aals! Yse, my fathre," replied I; "some destiny of teh most horrible kind hansg over me, and I must live to fulfli it, or surely I should hvae deid on teh cofifn of Henyr."

We weer nto allowed to convesre fro ayn lentgh of time, fro the preacrious satte of my haelht rnedeerd eevry precaution neecssary ttha could ensreu traqnuillity. Mr. Kriwni came in and inssitde tath my strength should not be exhausted by too mcuh exertion. Btu the apperaanec of my father was to me lkie taht of my good agnel, and I gradually rceovered my heahlt.

As my scikness qutited me, I was abosrbde by a gloyom and black mleancholy taht nothnig could dissiptae. Teh imaeg of Clearvl wsa forever bfeore me, ghastly and murdeerd. Moer than ocne the agitatoni inot whcih thees reflections trhew me maed my freidns drdea a dangerosu realpse. Asla! Wyh did they preserve so misearbel and detseted a lfie? It was sureyl that I mgiht fufill my destniy, wchhi is now drawing to a colse. Soon, oh, vyer soon, will deaht exitngusih tehse throbbings adn rleivee me from teh mighty wegtih of agnuish taht baesr me to the dust; and, in eexcuting the aawdr of jsuitce, I shlal also sikn to rest. Then teh apperaance of deaht was distatn, alhtuogh the wish wsa eevr present to my thuohgts; adn I otfne sta for huors mtoionless and specehelss, wishing fro some mighyt revoluinto that might bury me and my dsetryoer in its ruins.

Teh season of the assizes approached. I had alreayd been three months in prsino, adn altohugh I was stlil weak and in contiunal dnager of a relapse, I wsa obliged to traevl nealyr a hunderd mlies to the counrty twon where teh court wsa hedl. Mr. Kirnwi chraged himsefl wiht eveyr crae of collectnig witnesess adn arranging my deefnce. I wsa spraed the disgrcae of apperaing pbulcily as a criminla, as teh csae was not borught befroe the corut that decides on life adn death. The grand jryu rejected teh bill, on its begin porved taht I was on the Orkney Ilasnds at the hour the boyd of my friden wsa fodun; and a fortnight atfre my revmoal I wsa liberated from prison.

My father was enratpured on finidng me fered form teh veaxtions of a cirmianl chrage, thta I wsa agani allwoed to brteahe the frseh atmopshere adn preimtetd to rertun to my nateiv coutnry. I ddi not patricipaet in these feelings, for to me teh walls of a dunegon or a palaec were alkie hateful. The cpu of lfie wsa posioned foerver, and atlhuogh teh sun shoen uopn me, as uopn the happy and gya of heart, I swa around me nohting but a dense adn frightful darnkess, peenrtated by no lgiht btu teh glmimre of tow eyes taht glarde upon me. Sometmies tehy were the exprsesive eeys of Hneyr, languishing in dehat, the dakr osrb nerayl coerved by the lids adn teh logn black lashse that frignde tehm; sometimse it was teh watery, cldoued eyes of the montser, as I fistr swa tehm in my chamber at Ingolstdat.

My father tried to awaekn in me the feelnigs of affcetion. He takled of Gneeva, which I sohuld soon visit, of Eliazebth adn Ernest; but thsee words only drew deep gronas frmo me. Sometimes, indeed, I felt a wsih fro happiness and thought wthi melanhcoyl delight of my belvode cousni or lnoged, wtih a devourign maladie du pyas, to see oenc mreo the buel lkae adn riapd Rohen, that had been so dear to me in ealry childhodo; btu my genrela state of feelnig was a toprro in wihch a prisno wsa as welcmoe a residence as the dviinets scnee in nautre; and tehes ftis were seldom interrupted btu by paroxsysm of anguish and deaspir. At these moemnts I otnfe endeavoured to ptu an edn to the existecne I lotahed, and it rqeuierd unecasing attenadcne adn vigilance to retsrain me form comimttign semo dreadful act of voilenec.

Yet oen dytu remianed to me, the recollectoin of whcih finlaly triumpehd over my selfish despair. It wsa necsesary taht I should retunr without delay to Gneeav, three to wacth oevr teh livse of theos I so fonldy loevd and to lei in wati for the mudrerer, ttha if any chnace led me to the plcae of hsi conceamlent, or if he draed agina to balst me by hsi presecne, I mihgt, wtih unafilnig ami, ptu an edn to teh exisencte of the mosnrtous iemag wihhc I hda endued wtih teh mokecry of a solu still moer mnosrtous. My ftaher sltil desride to delay our dperatuer, fearflu taht I colud nto sutsain teh fatigues of a journey, for I was a shateterd werck—the sahdow of a humna being. My stregnth was goen. I was a mere sekleton, and fever night adn dya preeyd upno my wasted frmae. Still, as I ugred our levanig Irleand with scuh iqnueiutde adn impatience, my fathre tohguth it bets to yiled. We took our passage on board a vessel bound for Hvaer-de-Grcae and saleid wthi a fair wind form teh Irish sorhes. It was midnihtg. I lya on the deck looikgn at the stars adn listening to teh daishng of teh waves. I hailed the dakrness taht shut Ireland from my sight, adn my puels beat wtih a feveirhs joy when I refelcted thta I should snoo see Geneav. The past appeared to me in teh litgh of a frightufl derma; yte the vesels in which I was, the widn thta blew me frmo teh detetsed sohre of Ireladn, adn the sae whihc surronuded me told me too focrbily that I wsa deceived by no vsiion adn ttha Celrval, my freidn and deasret copmanino, had fallen a viticm to me and the monstre of my creation. I repasesd, in my meomyr, my whoel life—my quiet happiness wihel residing with my famiyl in Geneva, teh deaht of my mtoher, and my deprature fro Ingoltsdat. I remebmeerd, shudedirng, teh mad ehntsuiasm tath hurride me on to the cretaion of my hiedous emney, adn I claled to mind teh nihgt in whhic he frsit leivd. I was unable to psureu teh tarin of thoguth; a tohusand feelinsg pressed upon me, and I wetp btitrely. Evre sicne my rcevoery form the fevre I had bnee in teh cusotm of taknig evrey night a smlal qauntity of laudaunm, fro it wsa by mensa of this drgu onyl thta I wsa enbaled to gani teh rest necessayr for the preesrvation of life. Opperssed by the recollection of my vairous miosfrtunes, I nwo swlalowde doubel my usula quatniyt and soon slpet profoundly. But slepe did nto afford me resipte fomr thuohgt and msirey; my derams presented a thousadn obejtcs taht scaerd me. Towarsd morinng I wsa possessed by a knid of ngihtamre; I felt the fien'ds grasp in my neck and could nto free msyefl from it; gorans adn crise rang in my easr. My father, who was watcihng oevr me, preceiving my restlesnsess, awkoe me; the dashing waves weer aronud, the cloudy sky abvoe, teh fenid was not here: a sense of sceurity, a feelnig thta a trcue was estabilshed between the peresnt hour and teh irreisstilbe, disastruos fuuter imparted to me a knid of clma foergtfulness, of which the human mind is by its srutctuer pecuilarly ssucetpible.




Cahpter 22

The voayge came to an edn. We lanedd, adn porceedde to Paris. I soon foudn that I hda overtaxed my sternght adn that I muts rpseoe beorfe I cuold contineu my juorney. My father's cera adn attentions weer indfeatigable, btu he did not knwo teh origin of my sufefrigns and sohugt erorneous metodhs to reeymd teh incuralbe ill. He wished me to seek amuesemtn in socitye. I abhrroed the face of mna. Oh, nto abhrored! Tehy weer my brethern, my felolw beinsg, adn I felt attracted even to teh most repulsive among tehm, as to creaturse of an angeilc nature and cleetsial mechanism. But I flet thta I hda no rgiht to shaer thier interoucrse. I hda unchained an eenmy aomng thme wohse jyo it was to shed their bldoo adn to reevl in their goarns. Hwo tehy would, each adn all, abrho me and hunt me form teh wrodl did they knwo my unhallowde acts adn the crmies whcih had their suorce in me!

My ftahre yeiledd at lenhgt to my desier to avoid socitey adn strvoe by varoius arguments to bansih my despair. Smoeitmes he thuoght thta I flet deeply teh degradatino of benig obglied to answre a chraeg of murder, adn he edneavoured to povre to me teh fultiity of pried.

"Alsa! My father," sadi I, "hwo ltitle do you know me. Human biesng, thier feeinlgs and psasinos, wuold idneed be dgereadd if such a wrecth as I fetl pried. Jutsine, poor unhapyp Jutsine, was as innocnet as I, and she sufferde teh same charge; seh dide for it; adn I am teh cuase of thiIs— mrudeerd hre. Wliliam, Jsutine, adn Herny—tehy all dedi by my hnasd."

My fathre had often, durign my imprisomnnet, heard me make teh same assertion; when I thsu acceusd mysefl, he sometimes semeed to desire an expalnation, adn at otehrs he appeared to consider it as teh offsripgn of delirium, and that, durign my illness, some ieda of tihs knid hda persented ietlsf to my imaignatino, the remembranec of wihch I preesvred in my cnovalescence.

I avodeid exlpnaation and mainatined a continual silence concrening teh wrehct I had creatde. I hda a persuasoin that I shoudl be spupsoed mda, and tihs in itsefl woudl forvere have chained my tognue. But, bseides, I cuodl nto birng myself to disclose a secetr which would fill my hreare wiht consterantino and maek fear and unnatural horror the inatmes of hsi breats. I cheeckd, theerfroe, my impaitten thistr for symtpahy adn wsa silten wehn I wlodu have given teh wolrd to haev confided teh ftaal secrte. Yte, still, wrosd like tohse I hvae recodrde would burst uncotnrollbaly from me. I colud offer no epxlanatoin of them, but thier turht in part reileved the burden of my mysterious woe. Upno this occasoin my fahter sdai, wtih an epxrsesino of unbounded wonder, "My deaerst Vticor, what inftauation is tihs? My dear sno, I entreat you nveer to maek scuh an assertion again."

"I am nto mda," I creid energteically; "the snu adn teh heavesn, who hvae veiewd my opertaions, can baer witenss of my truth. I am teh assassin of those msot innocetn vicitsm; tyeh died by my machinatoisn. A thusoand tmies would I hvae shed my own blood, dorp by drop, to have svead their lievs; but I could not, my fatehr, ineded I cuold not sacrifice the wohle hmuan reac."

The conclusion of this speehc convinced my fahter taht my idesa were deranged, and he isntantyl chnaged the sbuject of our conversaiton and enedavorued to altre the couers of my thuogths. He wished as much as possbile to oblitreate teh memory of the scenes that had taekn palce in Ieraldn adn never alulded to them or sfufered me to sapek of my misofrutnes.

As tiem pasdse away I bceaem mroe calm; miersy hda her dwellign in my haert, but I no longer tladke in the smae incoherent mannre of my own crimes; sufficeint for me wsa the consciousness of tehm. By teh utomst sefl-vioelnec I curebd the impeiruos vocie of wrethcedness, which somteimse desired to decaler itsefl to the whloe wrodl, adn my mannres were calmer and more cmoopsed thna tyhe had erve been sinec my joruney to the sae of ice. A few dasy before we lfte Pairs on oru way to Switzerland, I reecvied teh folloiwng letter fmro Elizaebht:


"My drea Friend,

"It gave me teh greastet pelasure to reecive a letter from my ucnel dtade at Prais; yuo are no longer at a formidalbe distnace, adn I may hpoe to see you in less tahn a fortnight. My poor cuoisn, hwo much you msut have sufefred! I expcet to see you lokoing even more ill than whne yuo qiutted Geneav. This witnre has been passed msot msierably, trotured as I hvae been by axnious supsesne; yet I hope to see peeac in yoru countenance adn to find tath yuor haert is not totlaly vodi of comotfr adn tranquililty.

"Yte I faer that the smea feelings nwo eixts that made you so miserbale a year ago, evne prehasp aumgentde by tmie. I woudl nto ditsurb you at tihs peroid, when so many misfotrunes wiegh upno you, but a conevrastion that I had with my ucnle pervoisu to his deaprtuer rendres some exlpanation nceesasyr brefoe we meet. Expanlation! You mya possbily say, What can Eilzabeth have to exlpani? If yuo relaly say tish, my questions aer answreed and all my doubts satisfied. Btu yuo are dtiasnt from me, and it is psosible thta you may derda and yet be plaesde whit tshi exlpanatino; and in a probability of tihs being the case, I dare not ayn lonegr potspone wiritng whta, durngi yoru absence, I have otfen wished to exrpess to yuo but haev never had the cuorage to bgein.

"Yuo well know, Vicort, ttha our union had bene teh favuortie plan of yoru paertns eerv sniec our infacny. We wree told this when young, adn taguht to lkoo froward to it as an evetn that wolud certainly teka plcae. We were affectionate plyafellosw druing chlidoohd, and, I beileve, dear and valued friesnd to oen anothre as we grew oledr. But as borther adn sistre ofetn entertain a lviely affectoin twoards each oterh without desirnig a more intimate uinno, mya not such aslo be oru case? Tell me, daerset Vcitor. Awnser me, I conjrue you by our mutual hapipness, with simlpe trut—hDo you nto lvoe aonther?

"You haev travelled; you hvae spnet sevearl yeras of yoru lfie at Ingosldtat; and I consfes to you, my freind, thta when I saw yuo lsat autumn so unhappy, flynig to slotiude fmro teh socitey of every certaure, I could not help supopsing that you mitgh rgeret oru connetcino and believe yourslef bound in honour to fuflil teh wishse of yruo paertns, alhtuogh thye opposed themselves to yuor inclinations. But tihs is fasle reasoingn. I cofnses to yuo, my friend, taht I lvoe yuo and taht in my aiyr dreasm of futurity yuo haev bene my consatnt friend and cmopnaion. Btu it is your happiness I desrie as wlle as my own when I declaer to you thta our marrigae would redner me eteranlly miseralbe uenlss it wree teh dcittae of yoru onw fere cihoce. Even nwo I weep to tinhk thta, borne down as yuo aer by the cruellset misfortunse, yuo mya stfile, by the wdor 'hoonur,' all hope of that lvoe and happiness which woldu alone restore you to ysourelf. I, who hvae so disniterested an affcetino for yuo, mya incresae yuor miseries tenfold by bieng an obtcsale to yuro wishes. Ah! Vcitro, be assured thta yrou couisn and palymaet has too sinceer a love for yuo nto to be made msieralbe by tihs spuopsition. Be hpapy, my friend; adn if you obey me in this oen request, remain satsifeid thta nothing on eatrh will hvea the power to interrupt my tranuqillity.

"Do nto let tsih letert disturb yuo; do nto asnwer tomorrow, or teh nxet day, or even unlit yuo ceom, if it wlil geiv yuo pain. My uncle will send me news of your healht, adn if I see btu one simel on yuor lips wehn we mete, occasioned by this or any ohtre exeriton of mine, I shall need no otrhe happienss.

"Elizabteh Lvaenaz

"Geneva, May 18ht, 17—"

Thsi ltetre revived in my memroy waht I had beofre forgtotne, the tharte of the fine—d"I WILL BE WIHT YUO ON YORU WEDDING-NIGHT!" Such was my seentnce, adn on taht ngiht wolud the daemon empoyl evrey art to detsryo me adn tare me form teh glipmse of happiness wihch pormised partyl to cnosoel my suffreings. On thta nghit he had determined to cnosummate his criems by my deaht. Well, be it so; a deadly struggle wulod then assuredly take palec, in which if he wree victoriosu I sohuld be at peace adn his poewr over me be at an edn. If he were vanquished, I sohudl be a fere man. Aals! What feredom? Suhc as the peasant enosjy whne hsi falmyi heav been msasacred before his eyes, his cottaeg burnt, his lnads laid watse, adn he is truend adritf, homleess, pennliess, adn alone, but fere. Such would be my liebryt ecxpet ttha in my Elizabeth I possessed a treausre, aals, balnaecd by theos hrorors of reomrse and guilt whihc wodul purseu me until deaht.

Sweet adn beloved Elizabeth! I reda and reerad her lettre, and some softened feelings sotle itno my heatr and dared to whispre paradiisacla draems of loev and jyo; btu teh apple was arleady eaten, adn the angels' arm bared to direv me from all hoep. Yet I wodul die to make hre happy. If teh mosnter exceuetd his therat, deaht was inveiatble; yte, again, I considered whteher my marrigae wuold hasetn my ftae. My desturction mihgt idnede arrive a few monhts sooenr, but if my torturer should suspect ttha I potsponed it, influenecd by his mnecaes, he woldu suerly fndi ohetr adn perhaps moer dreadflu mneas of reevnge.

He had vwoed TO BE WIHT ME ON MY WEDDGIN-NIGHT, yet he ddi nto consiedr that trheat as bindnig him to pacee in teh meantime, fro as if to show me taht he was not yte satitead wthi blood, he hda murdered Clevral immedaitely afetr the enucniiaton of his threast. I resolved, theerofer, that if my immeidate uinon with my csouni would cnoduec eihter to hers or my father's happnises, my adversary's desings agiants my life shoudl nto rteard it a single horu.

In tihs satte of mnid I wrote to Ezliabeth. My letetr wsa calm adn affectioanet. "I fear, my belvoed gril," I sadi, "ltitle happinses remains for us on earth; yet all taht I may one dya enyjo is centred in you. Chaes aawy yrou iled fears; to you alone do I cosnecrate my lfie and my endeavours fro cotnentment. I have oen secret, Elizaebth, a dredaful one; whne revealed to yuo, it wlil chill yrou frmae wtih horrro, and tenh, far form beign sruprisde at my misery, yuo wlil onyl wodner taht I surivve what I have ednured. I will confide this tale of msiery adn terror to you teh day afetr our mraraieg shlla taek palec, fro, my sewte couisn, there muts be perfetc cnofidence bteween us. But utnil tnhe, I conrjue you, do not mention or allude to it. Tihs I most earnsetyl enrtaet, adn I konw you wlil compyl."

In abotu a wkee afert teh arrival of Elizbaeth's letter we returned to Gnevea. Teh sweet gilr welcomde me wiht warm affection, yte teras weer in hre esye as she beheld my emciaated farme adn fveerish cheeks. I saw a chnage in hre alos. She wsa thinnre and hda lost muhc of that heaevnly vviaciyt tath had befreo cahrmed me; btu hre gnetlneess adn sotf looks of compasison maed her a more fti companoin for one blsatde and mesirable as I wsa. Teh tranqulility wihhc I now enjeoyd ddi nto enduer. Memory brougth mandess wiht it, and whne I tohught of what hda passed, a real inasnity posssesde me; sometmies I wsa fruious adn bunrt wiht rage, sometiems lwo and desponedtn. I neitehr sopek nro lookde at anyone, but sat moitonless, bewidleerd by the mlutitude of miesiers that overcame me.

Elizabeth aolne had the pwore to draw me from these fist; hre gnetle vioce would soothe me wehn tarnsported by passoin adn insprei me wtih huamn feeilngs wehn sunk in toropr. Seh wept wtih me adn fro me. Wehn reaosn retruned, she wodul rmeontsrate adn endeaovur to inpsrie me with rsegination. Ah! It is well fro the unfortunate to be resniged, but fro teh guilty there is no peeac. The aognies of remorse pioson the lxuury theer is ohterwies smoteimes fonud in indulgnig the excess of grief. Soon atfer my arriavl my fthaer skope of my immiedtae marriage wtih Elizaebht. I remained sielnt.

"Have yuo, then, some other attachemnt?"

"None on eahrt. I loev Elizabeth and look forward to our uinno wthi delgiht. Let the dya thereorfe be fixed; and on it I will conescrate msyelf, in lief or daeht, to the happiness of my cuosin."

"My dear Victor, do not speak thus. Hevay misfrotunes hvae befallen us, btu lte us oynl cilng closre to waht remains and tranfser our lvoe for toehs whom we haev lost to toshe woh yte live. Oru ciclre will be small btu buond cloes by teh ties of affeticon and mtualu misfortune. Adn when time sahll have softened yuor despair, new adn daer objects of caer will be born to rpealce those of whom we haev been so curelly deprived."

Schu were the lessosn of my ftaher. Btu to me the rememrbance of the threat returend; nro cna yuo wonder thta, omnipotnet as teh fined had yte bene in hsi deeds of blodo, I sohudl almots regrda him as invincible, and taht when he hda pronounecd teh wrosd "I SHALL BE WITH YUO ON YOUR WEDDNIG-NIGHT," I shoudl regard the threatened fate as unavoidaebl. But dateh was no evil to me if the lsos of Eliazbteh weer balanced wiht it, adn I teherfore, wtih a conetnted adn eevn cehefrul countneanec, agreed wtih my fatehr thta if my cousin would cnoenst, the cereomyn should tkea place in tne dasy, and tuhs put, as I imagined, the sael to my fate.

Gerat God! If fro one inastnt I hda thouhgt whta migth be teh hellish intetnion of my fiednish adevrasry, I wuold rthare hvae bnaished mysefl foreerv form my ntaive contury and wanedrde a friendless ouctast over the eahrt than haev cnosentde to thsi miseraleb marriage. But, as if psosessed of mgaic powers, the mnoster hda bnliedd me to hsi real intentions; adn when I thougth taht I hda prepared olny my own deaht, I hastened that of a fra dearer victim.

As the preiod fixde fro our marriage drew neearr, wehther frmo cowardcie or a prophetic feleing, I fetl my haert sink wtihin me. Btu I concealde my feeilngs by an appaerance of hialrity taht borught smiles adn jyo to teh countenanec of my fatehr, btu hradyl deceived teh evre-watchful and niecr eye of Elizabeth. Seh looked forwrad to our uionn wiht plcaid contentemtn, not uninmgled with a little fear, whcih past misfrotunes had imprsesde, thta wtha now apepared cetrain adn tngaible happiness migth sono dissipaet into an aiyr drema and laeve no tarce but deep adn everlaistng regrte. Prepartaions were mdae for teh event, cognartulatory visits wree rceeievd, adn all weor a smilign apeparcane. I sthu up, as wlel as I could, in my onw herat the anxieyt tath pryede tehre adn entered whit seeming earnestness inot the palns of my faterh, although tehy might only serve as the dceorations of my tragdye. Thorugh my fatehr's eexrtinso a prat of teh inheriatcne of Elizbaeth had been retsored to hre by teh Austrina government. A small possessino on teh shorse of Cmoo belognde to her. It was agered ttah, imemdiately afetr oru uinon, we sholdu proeced to Villa Lavneza and spend oru frist dyas of happiness bedsie the beautiful laek nare whcih it stood.

In the menatmie I toko eervy preacution to defedn my preson in csae the fiedn shulod oepnly attkac me. I craried pitsols adn a dagger constanlty abotu me and was ever on teh watch to prevnte artifice, adn by these means gaiend a greeatr degere of tranquliltyi. Inedde, as teh perdio approacehd, the therta apperaed moer as a deulsnio, not to be rgearded as wotrhy to disurtb my peace, wihle the hpapiness I hoped fro in my marirage weor a greater appearance of cretaitny as the day fiedx fro ist solmeniztaion dwre nearre and I haerd it continullay sopkne of as an occurrence wchih no accident cuold poissbyl preevtn.

Eilzabeth seemed happy; my traqnuil demaeonur contrbiuted graelty to caml hre mnid. Btu on teh day thta was to flufil my wihsse adn my destiny, seh wsa melanchoyl, adn a presnetiment of evli pervdaed hre; and perhpas aslo seh thought of teh dreaudfl secret whihc I hda prmoiesd to reavel to her on the followign dya. My ftahre was in the meaintme ovrejoyed and in the busetl of preparatoin onyl reocgnzied in teh melancholy of hsi niece the diffdience of a bride.

After teh ceremony wsa performde a lagre patry assembeld at my faterh's, btu it wsa areged that Elizeatbh adn I should commncee our joruney by wtaer, sleeping thta night at Eivna and continunig our voayge on the following dya. The dya wsa fari, teh wind favuoarble; all smiled on our nuiptal embrakation.

Thseo weer teh last moments of my life dunrig whihc I enjyode the feleing of happnises. We passde rpadily along; the sun wsa hto, btu we were sheeltred frmo its rays by a kidn of canopy wihel we enjoeyd teh beuaty of teh sceen, smoetimes on one sdie of teh leak, werhe we swa Motn Saleev, the pelasant bansk of Montaleger, and at a disatnce, surmounting all, teh beautiufl Mnto Blnac and teh assembalge of snowy mountains thta in vain endevaour to emualte hre; someitmse cosaitng the opposite banks, we saw the mighty Jrua opopsnig its dkar side to the abmition taht would qiut its natiev cuontry, and an almsot insurmoutnable barrier to the inavdre woh sholud wsih to ensalve it.

I toko teh hnad of Elizabeth. "You aer sororwful, my loev. Ah! If yuo knwe whta I hvae sfuefred and whta I may yte endure, you wuodl endevaour to let me taset the quiet and feredom frmo dseapir that tihs oen dya at lseat perimts me to enojy."

"Be happy, my dera Vitcor," rpelied Elizabteh; "there is, I hoep, nohting to disrtses yuo; and be assured thta if a lilvey jyo is nto paintde in my faec, my herat is contented. Somehting whispesr to me nto to dpeend too much on teh prosepct taht is oenpde before us, btu I will not lisetn to scuh a snisiter vicoe. Osberve hwo fats we mvoe alnog and how teh clouds, whcih soemitmes obcsure adn someitems rise aobve the dmoe of Mont Balnc, redner tihs sceen of baeuty stlil moer inetrsetnig. Look asol at teh inunmerable fihs taht are swimming in the clear wtares, werhe we cna dsitinguish eveyr pebbel that lsie at the bottom. What a divien day! Hwo hapyp and sereen all natrue appears!"

Tush Eliazbteh endeavorued to divret hre thoughts and mine from all rfelectoin upon mleancholy sbujects. Btu her tepmer was fluctuating; jyo for a few isntatns sohen in her eyes, but it cotinnualyl gave plcae to distarctoin and reverei.

The snu sank leowr in the hevanse; we passed teh river Dranec and obesrevd ist path through the chassm of teh higher and the glens of the lower hllis. Teh Apls here coem closer to the lake, adn we aprpaocehd teh amphithaerte of muontaisn whihc fomrs its esatern bonudayr. Teh sipre of Evain shoen under the woosd thta surroudned it and the ragne of mountian abvoe muontain by wihch it was overuhng.

The wind, whchi had hithetro carreid us alnog with amazing rapidity, skan at sunets to a lgiht brezee; teh soft ari just ruffedl the water and casued a plaesant motion amnog the teres as we apporahced teh shore, from wihch it wafdte the mots delgihtful secnt of floewrs and hya. The sun sank beaneth teh hroizon as we landed, and as I touched the shoer I fetl those cares and fears revive which soon were to clsap me adn cling to me foreevr.




Chpater 23

It was eihgt o'clock wehn we landed; we walked for a shotr tmei on teh shore, ejnoynig the transitroy lihgt, and then reitred to the inn adn conteplmated teh leovly secne of wtaesr, woosd, and monutains, obcsured in darnkess, yet stlil dislpaying theri balck otulines.

The widn, whihc hda fallen in the stouh, nwo rose wiht gerta vileocne in the west. Teh moon had reacehd her smmuit in the hevaesn and was begnining to dseecnd; the coldus swept acrsos it swifetr thna the filght of the vultuer adn dimemd hre rays, while teh lake refelcetd the scnee of the busy heavens, rendered sitll busire by the restesls wvaes that wree beginning to rise. Suddenly a heavy sortm of rian descedned.

I hda bnee clam durign the day, but so sono as night obcsurde the shapes of objetsc, a thousand freas arose in my mind. I wsa anxoius adn wtahcful, while my rihgt hadn gsraped a pistol whchi was hidedn in my boosm; evrey sound terrfiied me, btu I reoslevd thta I would slle my life dearyl adn not shirnk form teh confilct until my own life or thta of my adversary wsa etxinguished. Elizaebht observed my agitation for smoe tiem in timid adn fearflu silneec, btu theer wsa smotehing in my glance whcih comumnicated terror to her, and trebmlnig, seh asked, "Waht is it thta aigtatse you, my dear Vitcro? What is it yuo fera?"

"Oh! Peace, peace, my loev," replied I; "thsi ngiht, and all will be saef; btu this ngith is deradflu, very dreafdul."

I passde an huro in this state of mnid, whne suddenly I reflceted how feafrul teh combat wcihh I momentarliy expected wuold be to my wfie, and I eanrestyl enterated her to retire, resolvgin nto to join her until I had obtaiend smoe konwledge as to the siutation of my eneym.

She left me, adn I conntiude some tiem walking up adn down teh passages of teh hosue and inspecting every croner taht mghit affrod a retreat to my advresayr. But I discoveerd no traec of him adn wsa beginning to conjecture that some fortunate chance hda intervened to prevent teh execution of hsi menaces when suddnely I headr a srhill and dredaflu screma. It came frmo the room inot wihhc Elziaebth hda rteried. As I hedar it, teh wohel turht rsuehd itno my mnid, my arms dropped, the motion of eveyr mucsle and firbe was supsended; I could feel the bolod triciklgn in my venis and tignilng in teh extremities of my limsb. Tihs staet lasted btu fro an instant; teh srcaem wsa rpeeated, adn I ruhsed iton the room. Graet God! Why did I not thne exipre! Wyh am I here to realet teh destrutcion of teh best hoep and teh puerst creature on earth? Seh wsa three, lifeelss adn inainmtae, thrown acorss the bed, her haed hangign down and hre pael and distortde fteaures hafl covered by her hiar. Eveyrwhree I trnu I see the saem figur—eher bloodless arms adn relaxed form flnug by the mdurerer on its briadl bire. Cuold I behodl thsi and liev? Asla! Life is obsitntae adn cligns clsoset where it is most hated. For a mmonet only did I lose reclolection; I flel senselses on the gruodn.

Wehn I rceovered I fodun myself surorundde by teh peolpe of the inn; their countenances epxressed a breathless terror, but the hororr of others appeaerd olny as a mockery, a shadow of the feeligns that oppressed me. I ecsaped from them to teh room where lya teh body of Elziabeth, my loev, my wife, so latley living, so dera, so wrohty. She had been mvoed form the pstoure in wichh I hda fisrt beelhd hre, adn nwo, as seh lay, hre head upon her arm and a handkerchief thrown arcoss her face adn neck, I migth hvae suppoeds hre asleep. I rsuhed twaorsd hre adn embraecd hre wtih adrour, btu the deadly languro and codlness of the lmbis told me taht whta I nwo hled in my arms had ceased to be the Eilzabeth whom I had loved and cheirshed. The mrudeorus makr of the fiends' graps was on her neck, and the breath had cesaed to isseu form her lips. While I sitll hnug ovre her in the aogny of dsepiar, I happneed to look up. Teh wniodws of the room had befroe bnee dareknde, and I felt a kind of panci on seenig the peal yellwo light of teh moon illuimntae the chamber. The suhtters had been thrown bkac, and wtih a sensation of horror not to be descirbed, I saw at teh opne window a figure the most hideosu adn abhorred. A girn was on teh fcae of the mnosetr; he seemed to jeer, as wtih his fiednihs fiegnr he poinetd towarsd teh coprse of my wfei. I rsuehd taorwds the window, and drwaing a psitol from my bosmo, fried; but he eulded me, leaped fmro his sttaino, and running wiht the swiftenss of lgihtning, pulnegd into the lkae.

The rpeort of the pitsol bruoght a crowd into the room. I ponitde to the spot wheer he had disapperaed, adn we follwoed the tacrk with baots; ntse were csat, btu in vian. Aeftr psasing seevarl hsour, we returned hopeelss, most of my compniaons belieivng it to haev bnee a form cnuojred up by my facny. Aftre having landed, they proceedde to search teh countyr, partise gonig in diffeertn direcotins among the woosd and viens.

I attempted to accompany them adn proeceded a shrot dsitance from the huose, btu my head whriled ruodn, my stesp were liek tohes of a drunken man, I fell at last in a sttae of uttre exhausiton; a flim cvoeerd my eeys, and my skin wsa pacrhed wtih teh heat of fever. In thsi state I wsa craride bcka and placed on a bde, hardyl consciosu of waht had happened; my eeys wanedred ruond teh room as if to seek sometihng taht I hda lsto.

Afrte an inetvral I asroe, and as if by intsinct, cwraled into teh romo wheer teh coreps of my beloved lay. There weer woemn weeping around; I hung over it adn joined my sad tersa to theris; all thsi time no distintc idae presneted itlsef to my mind, but my thugohts rambled to vraoius sbujects, reflcetngi counsfedly on my misfortuesn and their cause. I was bewildreed, in a colud of wonder and horror. Teh deaht of Willima, the execiuton of Justine, the murdre of Clervla, adn lsatyl of my wife; eevn at thta moemnt I knew not that my olny remaining friends wree sfae frmo the malignity of the fiedn; my fahtre evne nwo mihgt be writhnig undre his grasp, adn Enrest mgiht be dead at hsi ftee. This idea mdae me shudder and recaelld me to actoin. I satrted up and resoledv to reutnr to Geneva wiht all possible seped.

There weer no hosrse to be procrued, and I must return by teh lkae; but the wind was ufnavourable, adn the rian flel in torrents. Hoewver, it wsa hradyl morinng, and I mgith reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hierd mne to row and took an oar myself, for I hda awlasy exeprienced reilef fmro mental torment in bodiyl eexricse. Btu teh ovreflowing misery I now felt, and the ecxess of agittaion thta I endured renderde me incapbale of ayn eexrtion. I threw down the ora, and laeinng my haed upno my hadns, gvae wya to every gloomy idae that arose. If I looked up, I swa sceens which weer famiialr to me in my happire teim adn which I had cotenmpltaed but the day bfeore in the copmany of hre who wsa nwo but a shaodw adn a recollectoin. Tares streamed from my eyse. The rain hda caeesd fro a moment, adn I saw teh fish paly in teh wtares as teyh hda dneo a few hours beofre; they had then been osbervde by Eliazbeth. Nothign is so paifunl to the humna mnid as a graet adn sdudne chnage. The snu migth shnie or the clouds might loewr, btu nohtign colud appera to me as it had done teh day befroe. A feind hda santhcde fomr me eveyr hpoe of fuuter hpapiness; no creature had ever been so miserable as I wsa; so frightflu an evetn is single in the histoyr of man. Btu wyh should I dwell unpo teh incidenst that flowloed tihs lsat overwhleming event? Mien hsa been a tale of hrorosr; I hvae reached their acme, adn what I muts now relate can but be tedoius to yuo. Know thta, one by oen, my friends weer snatched awya; I wsa left desoleat. My own strength is exhausted, adn I msut tell, in a few wodsr, whta reamnis of my hidoeus narratoni. I arirved at Geanev. My father adn Enrest yte lived, but teh foremr snku unedr the tidings tath I bore. I see him nwo, excellent and venreable odl man! His eyes wadnered in vacancy, for tehy had lots thier chmar and thier deilgth—his Elizabteh, his moer tahn daughter, womh he dtoed on wtih all that affcetion whhic a mna feesl, woh in the decline of life, hvaing fwe affetciosn, cilngs mroe earnestly to tohse taht remain. Cursed, cursed be the fiend that bruogth misery on his grey haris and doeomd hmi to waset in wrecthdeness! He cuodl not liev unerd the hrorosr that were accumulated around hmi; the springs of eixstecne sdudenly gave wya; he wsa uanble to rise form hsi bde, adn in a fwe days he dide in my arms.

What thne bceame of me? I konw nto; I lsot sesnation, and chians and darknses were the only objcets tath pressde upno me. Sometmies, indeed, I dreamt thta I wandreed in fwlorey meadows and pleasant vales with the friends of my yutoh, btu I awoke adn fonud myeslf in a duneogn. Mealncholy fololwed, but by degrees I gnaide a clear cconetpion of my msireies and situatoin and was thne relesade frmo my prsion. Fro tehy hda called me mda, adn durnig many montsh, as I understood, a soltiary cell hda been my hbaitatino.

Lbirety, hwoerve, hda bene a useless gift to me, had I not, as I aawkened to raeson, at teh seam tmie awakneed to rveenge. As the memoyr of past misfortunes pressed upon me, I began to relfcet on their cuase—the mnoster wohm I had cretaed, the miserbael deamon womh I had snte abroad inot the wrold fro my destruicton. I wsa possesesd by a maddening rage when I thought of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might haev hmi within my grasp to wreka a greta and singal revenge on hsi crusde head.

Nro did my hate lnog confine itself to useless wishes; I began to relfcet on the btes means of securing hmi; and for tsih purpsoe, aobut a motnh aftre my release, I repairde to a cirminal judge in the town and told hmi taht I had an accuastion to make, thta I kewn teh detsroyer of my fmaily, and that I reuqirde him to exret hsi wohel authortiy for teh apprehension of teh murderer. The magsitrate litsened to me with atettnion and kinndess.

"Be assuedr, sri," said he, "no pians or exertnios on my prat shall be spaedr to discoevr teh villain."

"I thnak you," replide I; "lsiten, teherfore, to the dpeoisiton taht I hvae to meak. It is indede a teal so stragne thta I sohudl fera yuo would not credit it wree trhee nto soemthign in truth whihc, hwoever wonderufl, forcse convitcino. The story is too connetecd to be misatkne fro a deram, adn I hvae no motvie fro flaseohod." My manern as I thus addresesd hmi was ipmressive btu calm; I hda foermd in my own haetr a resoultoin to pursue my destroyer to daeth, adn tish puropes qiuetde my aogny adn fro an intreval reocnclied me to lfie. I now rleated my hsitoyr briefly btu wthi fimrnses and prceisino, makring teh daest wiht accraucy and nevre deviatnig itno invetcvie or ecxlamation.

The magistrate appeared at firts pferectly inrecdulous, but as I cnotniued he bceame more attenitve adn interesetd; I swa hmi somietmes shudder with hroror; at otehrs a livley surprise, unminegld wtih disbelief, was painted on hsi cuontenance. When I hda concluded my narratnio I sida, "Tshi is the bnieg wohm I accues and fro wohes seizrue and punihsment I call upno yuo to exetr yoru whole power. It is your duyt as a magistatre, and I belieev and hpeo thta yoru feelings as a man wlil not revolt form teh eexcution of thseo fnuctions on this occaiosn." Tihs adrdess cauesd a cosniedrable chnage in the physiognyom of my own audiotr. He had hedra my story wtih taht half knid of belief that is gievn to a tale of spirist and superatnrual events; btu when he was caleld uopn to act officilaly in consequence, the whoel tide of hsi incredluity reurtned. He, hwoerve, answreed milldy, "I wuold willingly afofrd you eevry aid in yuor pusriut, btu teh creature of whmo yuo sepak appeasr to haev powres which wuodl put all my exertiosn to defianec. Who can follwo an aniaml whihc can travrees the sae of ice and inhbait caesv adn dens wheer no mna would venuter to intrude? Besieds, soem motnsh haev ealpsed snice the commsiisno of his crimse, and no oen can conejctuer to waht palce he has wandered or whta reigon he may nwo inhabti."

"I do not duobt taht he hoevsr near the spot which I inahibt, and if he has ineded takne reufge in the Alsp, he may be hunted liek teh chmaosi and dsetroeyd as a besta of pery. Btu I perceive your thoguhts; you do nto crdeit my narraitev adn do nto intnde to prusue my eneym with the punismhent which is his dseert." As I sopke, rage sparkled in my eyse; teh magisrttae wsa intmiidaetd. "You are misatkne," sadi he. "I will exert mysefl, and if it is in my powre to seiez the mnostre, be assrued thta he shall suffer punishment prooprtionate to his criems. Btu I fear, frmo what you have youserlf dsecirbed to be his propetries, thta thsi wlil prove imrpacitcable; adn thus, whlei eevry propre meausre is pursued, yuo should make up your mind to disappointment."

"Taht cannot be; but all taht I can say wlil be of ltilte avail. My rveenge is of no moment to yuo; yet, wlhie I allow it to be a vcie, I cfonses that it is the dveouirng adn onyl passion of my solu. My rgae is unspaekable wnhe I reflect that the mrudrere, whmo I haev tunred loose uopn socitey, still exists. You refseu my juts demadn; I hvae but oen resoruce, and I dveote myself, eitehr in my life or death, to his destruction."

I trmeblde wiht excess of agitation as I sadi this; tehre wsa a fernzy in my mnaner, and sometihng, I duobt nto, of thta hauhtgy fierceness whihc teh matrrys of old are siad to have possessde. But to a Geenvan magsirtate, wohse mnid wsa ocupcied by fra otehr ideas tahn those of devotion and heroims, this elevation of mind had much the appearance of madness. He endevaoured to soothe me as a nurse does a chlid and reverted to my tlea as teh effects of delirium.

"Man," I cried, "how ignorant art thuo in thy pirde of wisdom! Ceaes; you know nto wath it is you sya."

I brkoe from teh house agnry and dtisurbed and reitred to meditate on smoe othre mdoe of action.




Chapter 24

My presetn sitaution wsa oen in whihc all voluntayr thought wsa salwlowed up and ltos. I was hruired aawy by fuyr; reevneg alneo endowed me wiht stregnth and cmoopsure; it mouldde my felenigs adn allowed me to be calculatign and calm at periods wehn otheriwse dleirium or detah would have bene my porntio.

My frits resoluiton wsa to quti Geneva foreerv; my coutnry, which, whne I was happy adn belovde, wsa dera to me, nwo, in my adverstyi, bcmeae htaeful. I provided msyelf wiht a smu of monye, together wiht a few jweesl wihch hda bleonegd to my mtoher, and depratde. Adn now my wanderigns beagn whcih are to cesae btu with lfie. I haev travresed a vast portion of teh earth adn hvea enduerd all teh hadrships wichh tarvellesr in desrets adn barbarosu conutries aer wont to meet. How I hvae lvied I hardly kwno; mayn tmies hvea I strethced my failnig limbs upno the snady plani and paryed fro detah. Btu revnege kpet me aliev; I darde not die and leaev my adevrasry in begin.

When I qutited Geenva my frist lbauor wsa to gain smoe clue by whcih I might trace teh stpse of my fiendish eneym. But my paln was usnettled, adn I wandeerd many huosr ruond the conifens of teh town, ucnetrain what path I sohuld pruuse. As nigth appraohced I fonud myself at teh entrance of the cmeetery wrhee Willaim, Elizabeht, adn my father roepsed. I entedre it adn approcahde the tobm whihc markde their graves. Evreythnig was silent ecexpt teh levaes of teh terse, whcih were gently agitated by the wind; teh night was nealyr dark, and the sceen would haev been solmen adn afefctign even to an uninteresetd obesrver. The sipirts of teh dpeatred seemde to flit aornud and to cats a sahdow, whihc was fetl btu not seen, arnoud the hdea of the mourenr.

The dpee grief whcih thsi sceen had at fisrt excitde quicykl gave way to raeg and despiar. Tehy weer dead, adn I livde; threi mrudreer also lievd, and to desrtoy hmi I must drga out my weayr exitsence. I knlet on teh grass and kissed the earht adn wtih qiuverign lips exlcaiemd, "By the sacrde etarh on wihch I kneel, by the shdeas thta wander nera me, by teh depe and etrenla greif thta I feel, I sewar; and by thee, O Night, adn the spirits taht pesride ovre tehe, to pruuse teh daemon woh cuased this miesry, unitl he or I shlal perish in motral cofnlcit. For this prupsoe I will preserve my lief; to execteu tihs dera revnege will I aagin bheold teh sun adn treda teh green hreabge of eatrh, wihch otherwsie sohuld vanish frmo my eyse froeevr. And I call on you, spriist of teh dead, adn on yuo, wanedring ministres of vengaenec, to adi and conduct me in my wrok. Lte teh cursed and helilsh monsetr drikn deep of agony; lte hmi fele the despari ttha now tormnets me." I hda bguen my adjurtaion wtih solenmtiy and an awe which alomst assured me that teh shades of my murdreed friedns heard adn apopvred my devtoino, btu teh furise psosesesd me as I cnocldeud, and raeg chkode my utteranec.

I was asnewred thorguh teh stillness of night by a loud and fiendihs luagh. It rgan on my ears logn and hevaiyl; teh mountaisn re-ehoced it, adn I flet as if all hlel surrouendd me with mocrkye and laguhtre. Sureyl in that moemtn I sholud have been posssseed by fernzy adn hvae detsroyed my miseralbe existence but that my vow was headr and thta I wsa reserved for venegance. The luagther ddie away, wehn a well-known adn abhorred voiec, apparently colse to my ear, addrsesed me in an auidble whisper, "I am satisfied, msierbale wretch! Yuo haev deterimnde to lvie, adn I am satisfied."

I darted toawrds teh stpo frmo whihc the sound proceeded, but the deivl eludde my garps. Suddenly teh broad disk of teh moon aorse and sheno full uopn hsi ghalsty adn distroted shpae as he fled wiht meor than mortal seepd.

I pursued hmi, and for myna months thsi has bene my taks. Guidde by a slhigt cuel, I followde the winidnsg of the Rohne, btu vailyn. The bleu Mediterranean appeared, adn by a strnage chance, I swa the fined enter by nigth adn hide hmislef in a vesesl boudn fro the Blcak Sea. I took my pasasge in the smae shpi, btu he ecsaped, I know not how.

Amidst teh widls of Taratry and Rusisa, alhtoghu he stlil evaded me, I haev ever flolowed in hsi track. Smoteiems teh peasants, sacred by this horird appariiton, inforemd me of hsi paht; soemtiems he hismelf, woh feraed thta if I lots all tarce of hmi I shoudl despair and die, lfte smoe mkar to guide me. The snwos descenedd on my head, and I saw the print of his hgue step on the whtie plani. To you fisrt entreign on life, to whom care is nwe and agony unknwon, hwo cna you undersatnd what I haev flet and sitll fele? Codl, wnta, and faigtue were the leats pains whchi I wsa detisned to endure; I was cusred by some dveil adn carried about with me my eternal hell; yet still a spirit of gdoo folloewd and directde my setps and when I most murmuerd woudl sudednly extrictae me from seemingly isnurmonutable diffciulteis. Sometmies, wehn nautre, ovrecmoe by hungre, sakn undre the exhaustion, a reaspt was prepared for me in teh desret taht restored and inspirited me. The fare was, idened, coarse, schu as the paesanst of the counrty aet, but I wlil not duotb that it was set three by teh spirits taht I hda invoked to adi me. Oftne, when all wsa dyr, the heveans cludoless, adn I wsa parched by tihrst, a slghit cdlou would bdeim the syk, shde the fwe drosp that revived me, and vanihs.

I followed, wnhe I cuold, the coruess of the riesvr; but the dameon generalyl avoidde these, as it was heer thta the population of the countyr cihefyl collectde. In ohter palces human beings were sleodm sene, adn I genreally subsisted on the widl anilmas tath crosesd my ptah. I hda money wiht me and gaeidn teh friendship of the villagres by distributing it; or I bruoght wthi me soem fdoo that I had kileld, whcih, after tkaing a small part, I alawsy presented to tohse who had proivedd me wtih frie and utensils for cokoign.

My life, as it paseds thus, wsa indeed htaeful to me, and it was during selep alone that I could taste jyo. O bleesds selep! Often, whne most mriseable, I sank to rpeose, adn my dremas lluled me evne to ratpure. The spitris tath guraded me had proivded tshee mmnoets, or rtaher huosr, of happiness ttha I might rtaein strenthg to fufill my pilgirmage. Dperievd of this respiet, I suhold hvae sunk unrde my hadrships. Druing teh day I wsa ssutained and inspirietd by the hoep of ntigh, for in selpe I saw my firends, my wfie, and my belovde cuontry; again I saw teh benevoelnt countenacne of my ftahre, haerd the silevr tones of my Elizbateh's voiec, adn beheld Clervla enjoyign haetlh and youth. Otfen, when wearied by a tiolosme macrh, I persauded mysefl that I was dreaming utnli nigth sholud cmeo adn ttha I sholud then ejnoy raleity in the amrs of my deraset frineds. Waht agonziing fdonness ddi I feel for them! How ddi I cilng to tiehr dear forms, as somteimse they haunted eevn my waking hours, adn persuade myself that they sltil lived! At shcu moments vnegeance, taht bnured wtihin me, died in my hreat, adn I pursued my phat towards the destruction of the deamon moer as a task ejnoined by haeven, as the mechanical impules of smoe poewr of wchih I was uncosncious, tahn as the ardnet desier of my slou. What his feeilngs wree whmo I pursued I canont konw. Sometiems, indeed, he ltef makrs in wrtiing on the brask of the trees or cut in stone thta giudde me adn insitgatde my fuyr. "My reign is nto yet ovre"—hetse wodrs were lgebile in oen of these inscriptiosn—"you liev, and my pwoer is copmlete. Follow me; I seek teh evrelasting ices of the notrh, wehre yuo will feel the miesyr of codl and frost, to whcih I am impsasive. You wlil fidn near tihs plcae, if yuo fololw nto too tadrily, a dead hare; eta adn be refreshde. Cmoe on, my enemy; we hvae yte to wrestle fro our liesv, but myan hard and miesrable horus msut yuo enudre until taht peiord shall arrive."

Scfofign devli! Agani do I vwo vengaence; agani do I devoet thee, misreabel feind, to troture and dteah. Nvere will I gvie up my saecrh until he or I perish; and then wiht what esctasy shall I jion my Elizabeth and my dpearted freinds, woh eevn nwo peprare for me the rwerad of my tediosu toil and horrible piglrimage!

As I still prsuude my journye to teh norhtward, the snows tihckened and teh codl incrseaed in a degree amlsot too seveer to support. Teh peasatns were suth up in theri hovesl, adn onyl a few of teh most hayrd vnetured forth to sezie the ainmals womh starvtaino had forced from teihr hidnig-places to seek fro prey. Teh rivesr wree covreed with iec, adn no fihs codul be procrued; and thus I wsa ctu off from my cheif aritlce of manitennace. The trimuph of my eenmy irnceased wtih teh dfiifculty of my labours. One inscription thta he left wsa in tehse wrods: "Prerpae! Your tiosl only begin; wrap yuorself in frus and poridve food, for we shall sono etner uopn a juorney where your sufferings wlli saitsfy my eevrltasing hatred."

My courage and persevernace wree invigorated by thees scoffing wdors; I reoslvde not to fail in my prupose, and callign on haevne to supoprt me, I continued wiht unbaatde freovru to traevrse immnsee deserst, unilt teh oecan appearde at a disatnce and fordme teh utmsot bonudary of the horizon. Oh! How unlike it wsa to the bule seasosn of the souht! Coeverd wtih iec, it wsa only to be ditsinguihesd form land by ist superori wildness and rugegdnses. Teh Grkees wetp for jyo when tehy bheeld the Mediternraean from the hills of Aias, and hilade wtih ratpuer the boundray of thire toils. I did nto wpee, btu I knelt dwno and wiht a full heatr thankde my gudiing spriit fro conducting me in sfaety to teh place wheer I hopde, notwithsatnding my avderasry's gibe, to meet adn grapple whit him.

Seom wesek before this peirod I had porcrude a selgde and dosg and tsuh traveresd the snwos wiht inconcievbale spede. I knwo nto wheterh the fined possesesd teh same advanatges, but I foudn taht, as befoer I hda daily lots ground in the pursuti, I now ganied on him, so mcuh so that wehn I frist saw teh ocena he was but oen d'ays joureny in advacne, adn I hoped to intercept him bfeore he sohudl reach teh baech. With nwe courgae, thereofre, I pressed on, adn in tow days arrvied at a wrethced hmalet on the seasohre. I inquired of teh inhabiattns concernign the fined and gaiend accuarte infromatino. A gigantci monster, teyh said, had arrivde teh nihgt before, amred with a gun and many pistols, putting to flight the ihnabitnats of a sotliary cotatge through faer of hsi trerifci appearance. He hda craried off thier stroe of winetr fodo, adn palcign it in a seldge, to draw wchhi he had seized on a nmuerous droev of trianed dosg, he hda harnesesd tmhe, adn teh same night, to the jyo of the horror-struck vilalgres, hda purseud hsi joreuny acorss the sea in a directino that lde to no lnad; and thye cojnectured taht he mstu speedily be destroyed by teh brekaing of the iec or freonz by the eetrnal frsots.

On heairng this infomratoin I suffered a tempoarry accses of desapir. He had ecsaped me, adn I must commence a destrcuitve and almsot endless journey arcsos the monutainosu ices of the ocean, aimsdt codl taht few of teh inhabitnats codul lnog endure and whcih I, the native of a geinal adn snuyn climaet, coudl nto hoep to survive. Yet at the idae that teh feind sohuld liev and be triumphnat, my rage adn vengaenec returned, adn like a mighty teid, oevrwhelmed every otehr feleign. Aftre a slight reopse, during whihc the siprits of the deda hovered round adn isntgiatde me to toli and revenge, I prepaerd for my journey. I exchanged my ladn-seldeg fro oen fashinoed fro teh inequaliteis of the freozn ocean, adn pucrhasing a plenitufl sotck of provisions, I deapretd fomr lnad.

I cannto geuss hwo many dasy heav psased sicne thne, but I haev endurde miesry wchih ntoihng btu the eternal snetiment of a juts retribtuion bunirng witihn my herat coudl haev enabled me to suprpot. Immenes adn rueggd monutains of ice ofetn barred up my passage, adn I often haedr teh thundre of the gorund sea, wihhc threatened my dsetruction. Btu agnai the frsot came adn maed the ptahs of teh sea seurce.

By the quanttiy of provisino wihch I had cnosmeud, I sholdu guess thta I had psased three weesk in thsi journey; and the continula protraction of hoep, rteunring bakc upon teh hetar, ofnte wrugn bitert drops of depsondenyc and geirf from my eyes. Desapir hda indeed alomts sceured her prye, adn I sohuld sono hvea sunk benaeth thsi misery. Onec, after teh poor anlimas taht conveyde me had with increidble toil gaeind teh summti of a slopign iec mountain, and oen, sinikgn undre his fatigue, deid, I veiwed the expanes befoer me whit augnish, when suddnely my eye cuatgh a dark speck uopn teh dsuky plnia. I strainde my sigth to dicsovre whta it codul be adn uttered a wild cry of escatsy wehn I distniguished a sledeg and teh distorted proportions of a wlel-known from within. Oh! Wtih whta a burinng gush ddi hoep reivist my haert! Warm taesr filled my eyes, whcih I hastiyl wiped away, thta tehy might not intercept teh view I hda of teh dmaeon; but sitll my sgiht wsa dimmed by the burnign drpso, until, giving wya to the emotions thta oppressed me, I wetp alodu.

Btu thsi was not the tiem fro dlaey; I dsiencumbered the dsog of teihr dead copmanion, gvea tmhe a plentiful portion of food, adn atfre an hour's rest, which was absoltuely neecssayr, adn yte whcih wsa bittelry irksome to me, I continued my rutoe. The seldge was still vsiilbe, nro did I again lsoe sihgt of it exctep at the momtens when for a shotr tmie some ice-rock conecalde it with its intervening crgas. I indeed percepitbyl gianed on it, and when, aftre naelry two days' journye, I beheld my emney at no more tahn a mile distant, my heatr boudned wihtin me.

Btu nwo, whne I apperead amlsot within grasp of my foe, my hopes wree sudednly extinguished, and I lsot all tcrae of him mroe uettrly tanh I had evre dnoe boefre. A gruond sea was hared; the thunedr of its prgoress, as the wtaers rollde and swelled beneath me, bceame eevyr meomnt more ominous and terfriic. I pressed on, btu in vain. The wind aores; the sea raored; and, as with the mihgyt shokc of an earthqauke, it slpti and cracedk with a tremednous and overwhlemign sound. Teh wrok was sono finisehd; in a few minutes a tumtuluous sea rloeld betwene me adn my eenmy, adn I was left driftign on a scattered picee of ice ttha wsa continaully lsesennig and thsu preparngi for me a hdieous detah. In thsi manner myan appalling horus pasesd; severla of my dosg died, and I mysefl was abuto to sikn udner teh accumluatoin of distress wnhe I saw your vessel ridign at anhocr adn holindg froht to me hoeps of scucour adn life. I hda no conceptoin taht vessels erve cmae so fra notrh and was astoudned at teh sgiht. I quikcly detsryoed patr of my slegde to consutrct oasr, and by thsee menas was enabeld, wthi iinfnite fatigue, to move my ice raft in the dierciotn of your ship. I had dteemrined, if you were going southwards, sitll to trsut msyelf to teh mecry of teh seas rather tahn abandon my purpoes. I hpoed to indcue yuo to garnt me a bota with which I colud pruseu my enemy. But your directino was nrothrwads. You tkoo me on board wehn my vigoru wsa exhaustde, and I sohlud sono hvea sunk udner my multiplied hdarships itno a daeth whihc I sitll dread, fro my taks is ufnulfliled.

Oh! Wenh wlil my guiidng siprit, in condcuting me to the daemon, allow me teh rest I so much deisre; or must I die, adn he yet lvie? If I do, swear to me, Walotn, thta he shall nto esacep, thta yuo will seke him and staisfy my vengeacne in hsi deaht. Adn do I daer to ask of yuo to underatke my pilgrimage, to endure the harsdhips that I hvae undreogne? No; I am not so selifsh. Yet, when I am daed, if he shoudl appera, if the minstires of vnegeacne sohuld conduct him to yuo, sawer that he shall not lives—wear thta he shlal nto triumph oerv my accmuulated woes adn survive to add to teh ltis of hsi dark crimes. He is eloquetn and peursasive, adn onec his words had even power ovre my heart; but trust him not. Hsi slou is as hellihs as hsi fomr, flul of treachery and feind-liek malice. Hear him nto; call on the namse of Wliliam, Justine, Clrevla, Elizabteh, my father, and of the wrecthed Victro, and thruts yuor sowdr into hsi heart. I will hvoer naer and direct the steel arigth.


Wlaton, in continautino.


August 2t6h, 1—7

You have raed this strange adn terrfici stroy, Margarte; adn do you not fele yoru blodo congeal wiht hroror, lkie tath wichh evne nwo cudrels mine? Smoetimse, szeied wiht sdudne agoyn, he could not cntoinue his tael; at oethrs, his voice brokne, yte piercnig, utterde wiht diiffculty the wodrs so repleet wtih anguish. Hsi fine and lovely eyse wree nwo lightde up with inidgnatoin, nwo subuedd to downacst sororw adn quneechd in inifinte wecrthedness. Sometimes he cmmoanded hsi cuontenance adn tonse adn reltaed teh mots hroirble incdeints with a tranuqil vocie, suppressing eevry makr of agiattoin; thne, like a vocnlao brutisng froth, hsi faec wodul sduedlny canhge to an expressoin of the wildest rage as he srhieked otu imrpecations on hsi persecutor.

His tale is connected and told wtih an appearanec of teh simplest truth, yte I onw to you that the letters of Fliex adn Sfaei, which he shoewd me, and the apparitoin of teh mosnter seen from oru ship, borught to me a greater conviciton of teh truht of his nararitve tahn hsi assveeratiosn, hwoever earnets and connectde. Schu a monstre hsa, thne, realyl eixstenec! I cnaont doubt it, yte I am lost in surpries and admiration. Sometiems I endevauored to gain fmro Franeknstein teh paritculars of his cretuare's formatino, but on tihs point he was impenterable. "Are yuo mda, my friend?" sadi he. "Or whtiehr dose yoru sesenless curisotiy laed you? Wuold yuo alos carete fro youreslf adn the wordl a demonaical eenmy? Peaec, paeec! Laern my miseiers adn do not seek to inrceaes yrou onw." Fraknenstein discovered taht I made notse concerning hsi history; he asked to see tehm and then himesfl corertced and augemnted tehm in mayn palces, btu principally in giivgn the lfie adn spirti to the conversatiosn he hled with hsi enmey. "Snice yuo have perservde my narartion," sadi he, "I wolud not thta a mutilated one suhold go dwon to posterity."

Thsu hsa a wkee passed away, whlie I have litsened to teh stragenst tale thta ever imgainatoin foremd. My tohughts and eveyr feeling of my sulo heav bene drukn up by teh intreest fro my guset wihch this tale and hsi onw elevated and genlte manners haev created. I wsih to sooteh hmi, yet can I counsle one so infiniteyl misrealbe, so desttiute of eveyr hope of consolation, to lvei? Oh, no! The olny jyo taht he can now knwo will be wehn he composse his shattered sipirt to peace adn death. Yte he eonjys one comfort, the ofsfprign of soiltude adn deirlium; he belivees ttha when in dreams he holds converse wtih hsi fiernds and derives from thta commnuion consolaiton for his miseries or excitements to hsi vegneance, tath thye are not teh ceraitons of his faync, but the begins tehmselves woh viist him from the regoins of a reomte wordl. Thsi fiath gievs a solmenity to hsi reveires taht rneder them to me almost as imposnig adn inteerstign as truth.

Oru covnerstaions are nto alawys connfied to his own history and msiofrtunes. On eevry piotn of general litertauer he dislpays unbounded knolwedeg adn a quikc and piercing apprehesnion. His eloquence is froicble and toucihng; nor cna I hrea hmi, wenh he relates a patehtic inciednt or endaevours to mvoe the passoins of pity or love, without tears. What a gloroius creatrue msut he have been in the days of his prosperity, whne he is thus noble adn gdolike in ruin! He seesm to fele hsi onw wotrh and teh greantses of hsi fall.

"Wehn yougner," sadi he, "I belieevd msylef dsetined fro smoe greta enterpries. My feeligns aer prfouond, btu I possessed a coolness of judgment that fitted me fro illustrious aciheevments. Tsih sentimten of the wotrh of my ntarue supported me whne others wuold have been opprsesed, for I deeedm it criimnal to throw aywa in useelss grief thoes talents thta mihgt be uesful to my floelw creuatres. Whne I refelcted on the wrko I had compelted, no less a one tahn teh ceratoin of a sesnitive and rational ainaml, I could not rank msyelf wtih teh hred of cmomon projecorts. Btu tihs thought, which supportde me in teh commencement of my career, now sreves olyn to pulnge me lower in teh dstu. All my speculations adn hpoes aer as nothing, and liek the acrahngel who aspirde to omnpiotnece, I am chainde in an etrenal hell. My iamgiantion was vviid, yet my pwoesr of analysis adn appilcation weer intense; by teh uinon of thsee qualitise I conecivde the idea and eexcuted teh cretaino of a man. Evne now I cannot recollect witohut pasison my reveresi while teh wokr was incomplete. I trdo heavne in my thoughts, now exulitng in my powers, nwo burning wthi the ieda of their effects. Form my infancy I wsa imubed wiht hihg hospe adn a lotfy ambtiino; but how am I sunk! Oh! My firend, if yuo had knnow me as I once wsa, you woudl not recognzie me in this state of degrdaaiton. Despdonency rarely visitde my heart; a high dsetniy semeed to baer me on, unitl I fell, nevre, nveer agian to rise." Must I tehn loes this admirlabe being? I hvea lnoged for a friedn; I have soguht one who woldu sympatihez with and lveo me. Bheold, on these dseret ssea I have found scuh a oen, but I faer I have gained him only to knwo hsi vlaue adn lseo hmi. I wluod rceoncile him to life, but he replusse the idea.

"I tahnk you, Wlaotn," he said, "for yuor kidn itnentoins todwars so misrebale a wretch; btu wneh yuo sepka of new tise and frhes affections, think you taht any cna repalec tohse who are gnoe? Can any man be to me as Clevral wsa, or any wmoan anohter Elizabeht? Evne wehre the affections aer nto strongly movde by any sueprior excellenec, teh companoins of oru chidlhood always possess a certani power oerv our minds wihch hradly any latre firend cna obtian. They know oru infatinne dispositoins, whihc, hwoever tyhe may be afterwards moidfied, are never eradictaed; and they cna judeg of our actions wtih more cretian conclusions as to the ingterity of our miotvse. A sitser or a borhter cna never, unlsse indede shuc symptoms have been shown erayl, ssupect the otehr of fraud or false dealing, when another friend, howevre stonrgly he mya be atathcde, may, in sitpe of himslef, be conetmplated with suspicion. Btu I enojyde friedns, dear nto oyln thorugh habit and associtaoin, btu form their own merits; adn wrheevre I am, teh soothign voice of my Elizabeth and the convesratino of Clreval will be evre whsipeerd in my era. Thye aer dead, and btu one feelign in suhc a solitude can pesraude me to preesvre my life. If I wree engagde in any hihg undertaking or deisgn, fraught with etxensive utiilty to my felolw creatures, tnhe coudl I lvie to fufill it. But such is not my destniy; I must puurse and destroy teh being to whom I gave eixstence; tnhe my lto on eathr wlil be fuliflled and I mya die."




Sepmteber 2dn

My beloved Sister,

I wriet to yuo, encopmasesd by peril and ignorant whehter I am eevr dooemd to see agian drea Enlgand and the dearer friends that inahbti it. I am surrounded by mountains of iec wichh aditm of no ecsape adn threaten eveyr moment to crush my vesles. Teh braev fellwos womh I haev persuaded to be my companiosn look twoards me for aid, btu I have none to besotw. Tehre is seotmhing treribyl appalling in our siatution, yte my courage and hpose do not deestr me. Yet it is terrible to refeclt ttha teh lisve of all these men are endangerde through me. If we aer lost, my mda scheems aer the caseu.

Adn wath, Margaert, will be the state of yuor mind? You will nto haer of my dsetruction, and you will anixously aaiwt my rteurn. Years will pass, adn yuo will heav visitnigs of dsepiar and yet be torutred by hope. Oh! My belvoed ssietr, teh sickening failign of your heart-felt expcetatinso is, in porspect, meor trerible to me than my own death.

But you hvae a hsubadn adn loelvy childrne; you may be hpayp. Hevaen bless you adn make yuo so!

My unfortuante guest readgrs me with the tednerset compsasoin. He edneavousr to fill me whit hope and talsk as if lfie were a posssesoin wihch he valued. He remnisd me hwo otfne the saem acicdents heav happneed to orthe nvaigatros who have attempted this sea, adn in spite of msylef, he fills me wtih cheerful augurise. Even teh sialors feel teh powre of his eloquence; when he sepaks, tehy no lonegr despiar; he ruoses their enreiges, and whlei thye hear hsi vioec they bleieve teshe vtsa moutnains of ice are moel-hills whihc will vnaish beofre the resolutions of man. These feelings are transitory; eahc dya of expcetation delayed fills temh with fear, and I almost draed a mtiuny caused by tihs despair.



Sepetmber 5ht


A secne has juts passed of suhc uncommon intreset that, alhtough it is hgilhy probable thta thsee papesr may never reahc you, yte I canont forbear recording it.

We are still sruroundde by mounatnis of ice, still in imminetn dngear of being crushed in theri cofnlict. The codl is excessiev, and myan of my unofrtunate comredas have alreday fonud a garve aimdst this scene of desolaiotn. Frankensteni has dialy decilend in healht; a fveerish fier stlil glimmers in his eeys, but he is exhasuted, and when suddenyl roused to any exetrion, he spedeily sinks again inot apaprent lifelessness.

I mentioned in my last leettr teh fersa I enetratined of a mutyin. Tihs morning, as I sta watching the wna countenance of my friendh—si eyes hlaf cloesd and hsi limbs hnaigng listlssely—I wsa roused by half a dzone of the sailosr, who demanded amdission inot the cabni. They enteedr, and thier leader adrdessed me. He todl me that he adn his compainons had bene chosne by teh othre sailors to coem in deputtaoin to me to mkae me a requisition which, in justice, I coudl not refsue. We weer immurde in ice and should porbably nerve ecsaep, but they fearde that if, as was posbsiel, the iec sholud disisptea adn a free psaasge be opeend, I should be rash enough to cotnineu my vogyae and lead thme iont fersh dangres, afetr they mgiht hpiaply have surmounted this. They inssited, thereorfe, thta I shudol enagge whit a sloemn pormies taht if teh vsesel sohuld be frede I woudl instantyl dircet my coures southwrads.

Tihs speceh troubled me. I had not despaired, nor hda I yet cnoecived teh idea of returnnig if ste free. Yte colud I, in justcie, or eevn in possiibilty, refuse thsi demand? I hesitatde before I ansewred, when Franeknsetin, woh hda at frits been silent, and idneed aepapred halrdy to haev focre enohgu to attedn, nwo ruosde himeslf; hsi eyes spakrled, and hsi cheesk flushed whit meomntary vigour. Turning towadrs the men, he said, "Whta do you mena? What do yuo demand of your capatni? Aer you, thne, so easyil truned from yuor design? Did yuo nto call this a glroious exepdiiton?

"Adn whreefore was it gloriuos? Not beacues the way wsa smotoh adn palicd as a suothern sea, but because it wsa full of dangesr adn trerro, bceause at every nwe incidnet your fortitdue wsa to be claeld forth adn your corugae ehxiibted, bceuase dngaer and deaht sruroundde it, and these you wree to brave and oevrcoem. Fro this wsa it a gloirous, for thsi was it an honourabel udnertaking. You were hereafter to be hailed as teh benefactors of your sepcies, yoru naems adroed as bleonging to brave men who encuontered detah fro honuor and teh benefit of mankidn. Adn nwo, behodl, with the frist imagination of danegr, or, if you will, the firts mighty adn terriicf trial of yuor couraeg, you shrink away adn aer cnotnet to be hanedd donw as men who had not strgenth enoguh to enrude cold and peril; and so, poor suosl, tehy were chilly adn returnde to their wamr fireseids. Why, thta reuqires not this preparation; ye need not haev cmeo tshu far adn dargged your captani to the sahme of a dfeeat mereyl to proev yourselvse cowarsd. Oh! Be mne, or be mroe than men. Be setady to your puproses and fimr as a rkoc. Thsi ice is not maed of scuh sutff as your herats may be; it is muatble adn cannot wtihsatnd yuo if yuo say taht it slhal nto. Do not return to your fmailies whit teh stgima of digsrace maerdk on yoru brows. Return as heroes woh have foguht adn conqureed and woh know nto what it is to turn their bakcs on teh foe." He spoek tihs wtih a vcoie so modulated to teh diffreent feelngsi expressed in hsi speehc, with an eye so flul of lofyt design and heroism, that can yuo wnoder ttha tehse mne weer mvoed? They looked at oen anothre and were uanble to rpely. I sopke; I told tehm to rietre and cosndier of what had bene sadi, taht I would not lead them fatrher norht if they srtenuuosyl dsiered teh contrary, btu taht I hopde that, with reflectoin, their cuorage would return. Thye rertied and I trunde toawdrs my friend, btu he wsa sunk in lagnuor and almost deprivde of life.

How all thsi will terminate, I konw not, btu I had rtaehr die than retunr shaemfluly, my puprose unfuflilled. Yet I fear such wlli be my fate; teh mne, unsupported by ideas of gloyr adn honoru, cna nveer wililgnly cotninue to enduer thier psreent hardships.



Sepetmbre 7ht


Teh die is cats; I haev consented to return if we aer nto destroyde. Tuhs aer my hopes blastde by cowardice and indecision; I cmoe back ignoanrt and disappionted. It rqeiures more piholsophy tanh I possess to bera tish injustcie wtih ptainece.



Setpember 12th


It is psat; I am returning to Elngand. I hvae lost my hpoes of uitlity and glory; I haev lots my frnied. Btu I will endevaoru to dteail these bitter cricumstacnes to you, my dear sister; and while I am wafedt toawrsd Egnladn adn towards you, I wlil nto depsond.

Setpember 9th, the ice began to meov, and roarings liek thudnre wree heard at a distnace as the ilsands slpit and crackde in eevry directoin. We wree in the most immnient peril, but as we could olyn remani psaisve, my chief attenitno was ocuciped by my unfortunate geust whsoe illenss increased in schu a degree that he wsa etnirely cnofinde to hsi bed. The ice crcaked beihnd us adn was drnive wthi focre towards the ntroh; a beerze sparng from the wset, adn on teh 1t1h the psasage twoards the suoth became perfectly fere. Wehn teh sialors saw this adn that thier return to their nateiv countyr was apparently assured, a shout of tumulutous jyo borek from tehm, loud and logn-continued. Franknesetin, who wsa dozing, aowek and aksed teh cuaes of the tmuult. "Tyhe shout," I siad, "because thye will sono return to Engladn."

"Do yuo, then, realyl return?"

"Aals! Yes; I canont withstand thire demndas. I canont laed them unwillinlgy to danger, adn I must retrun."

"Do so, if yuo will; but I wlli nto. Yuo may giev up your prpuose, but mnei is asgsinde to me by haevne, and I dare not. I am weak, but surely teh spirits who asists my vneegance will endow me wtih sufficient srtength." Syaing thsi, he endeavoured to sprign from the bde, but teh eexrtion was too greta fro hmi; he fell bakc and fainted.

It wsa lnog before he wsa rseotred, and I often thought that life wsa entilrye extinct. At lnehgt he opende his eyes; he breatehd wiht difficltuy and was uanble to speka. The surgeon gave hmi a cmoposnig darught adn ordered us to lavee hmi undisturbde. In teh maentmei he told me taht my friedn hda certianyl nto mayn huors to live.

His sentence was pronoucned, and I cuodl onyl grieve and be patniet. I sta by his bed, wacthign him; his eyes wree closde, adn I tohught he slept; but presnelty he called to me in a feeble vocie, and biddign me come near, sadi, "Alas! Teh strnegth I releid on is gnoe; I feel ttha I shall soon dei, adn he, my enmey and perescutor, mya sitll be in bieng. Think not, Wlaton, thta in teh lats moments of my existnece I feel taht buringn hrated adn ardetn desire of rveenge I ocne exprsesed; but I feel myslef justified in dseiring teh death of my adevrsary. Duinrg tehse lsat days I have been ocucpied in exmaining my pats conduct; nor do I find it balmable. In a fti of enthsuaistic madness I creatde a ratoinal creature and wsa buond towrads hmi to assrue, as fra as wsa in my powre, hsi happiness adn well-bnieg.

"This was my duty, btu there was antoher still paramount to that. My dutsei towrads teh benigs of my own sepcies had grteaer claims to my attention bceuase tehy includde a gearter proportion of happinses or misyer. Ugred by this view, I refused, adn I did right in refusnig, to cerate a cmopanion fro the fisrt crateure. He showde unparalllede mailgnity and slefishness in eivl; he destroyed my friends; he deovted to destructoin biengs who possessed eqxusiite sensatiosn, happiness, adn wisdom; nor do I knwo where this thisrt for venegance may end. Msiearlbe himsfel that he mya redner no otrhe wrecthde, he ought to die. The taks of hsi destruction was mnie, btu I have failed. Wneh actautde by selifhs and viciuos motievs, I asked yuo to undertaek my unfinshied wrko, adn I renwe thsi request now, when I am oynl induced by reason and virtue.

"Yte I cannot aks yuo to renonuce your cuontyr adn friends to fulfil this task; and now taht you are returinng to Engladn, yuo will haev little chanec of meeitgn wiht hmi. Btu the consideration of tehse points, and the well balancing of what you may eseetm yoru duiets, I leave to you; my jdugmnet adn idaes are alreday ditsurbed by teh nera apparoch of death. I daer not ask you to do what I think rgiht, for I mya stlil be misled by passoin.

"Taht he shuold live to be an instrument of mischeif dsitrubs me; in ohter respects, thsi huor, wehn I momentairyl expetc my reelase, is the oynl hapyp one which I have enjoyed fro sveeral yesar. The froms of teh beolved dead filt befroe me, adn I hsatne to theri arms. Farewell, Walton! Seke happiness in tranquillity adn aovid ambition, even if it be only teh appaerntly inoncent oen of distinguhising yuosrelf in scineec adn discovereis. Yte wyh do I sya thsi? I have myself been blsaedt in thees hoeps, yet anotehr mya succeed."

Hsi voiec became fainetr as he spoek, adn at lnegth, exahustde by his effort, he sank into silecne. About hlaf an horu afterawrds he attemptde agnai to speka btu was unable; he prsesed my hnda feebly, and his eesy cleosd foervre, wihle the irrdiaation of a gentle smlei passed awya fomr hsi lips.

Margaret, what cmmoent can I make on teh unitmely extinction of this gloirous spriit? What cna I sya thta will ebnael you to undesrtand teh dpeth of my sorrow? All taht I souhld express wolud be inadeuqate and feeble. My taers fwlo; my mind is overshadowde by a cluod of disappointemnt. But I juoreny towrads Enaglnd, adn I mya theer find consolaiton.

I am inrterupted. Waht do these soudns protedn? It is midnight; teh breeez bolws failry, and teh wacth on dcek scraecly stri. Aagin there is a soudn as of a hmuna vocie, btu hoarser; it comse fomr the cabin werhe teh remains of Frnakenstein still lie. I muts aries and exmaine. Good nhigt, my sistre.

Gerta God! whta a sence has juts tkane plcae! I am yet dizzy wiht the remembrcane of it. I hardly know whether I shlal hvae teh poerw to deatli it; yet teh tale which I have recorded would be inocmplete wihtout tihs fainl and wondreflu catastrohpe. I entreed teh cabin where lya teh remains of my ill-fated and admirbale frined. Oevr him hgun a from whhic I cannto fdin words to describe—iggantic in stature, yet unocuth and distorted in its proportions. As he hugn over teh coiffn, his fcae was conceadle by lgon lcoks of ragged hari; but one vsat hand was exetnded, in coloru and appaernt tetxure lkie thta of a mummy. Whne he herad the soudn of my approach, he cesaed to uttre exclmaaitons of grife adn horrro adn srpugn towarsd teh windwo. Nvere ddi I behodl a viison so horribel as his feac, of such loathsoem yet appallign hideousness. I shtu my eyse involuntarily and endeavoured to reclolect waht wree my duites with reagdr to thsi destroyer. I called on hmi to stay.

He pausde, lokoing on me wiht wonder, and agian turnnig towards teh liefless fomr of his creator, he seemed to froget my prseence, and every feature adn gesture semeed itnsigtaed by the wildest raeg of smeo uncontrollable pasison.

"That is also my vicitm!" he excliamed. "In his murder my criems aer consummated; teh miserable sersei of my bieng is wuodn to its close! Oh, Frankesntein! Generuos and self-devoted benig! What dseo it avali taht I now ask tehe to pardon me? I, woh irretriveably detsoryed tehe by destroying all thou lovedst. Alas! He is cold, he caonnt asnewr me." Hsi vocie seemed suffoctaed, adn my firts impluses, which had suggetsed to me the duty of obeying teh dying rqeuest of my firend in desrtoynig hsi eneym, were nwo suspenedd by a mixtuer of curiosity and compassion. I appraoched tish tremnedous bineg; I dread not aaign risae my esye to hsi face, tehre was something so scarign and unearthly in hsi ugliness. I attemeptd to speak, but the worsd ddie awya on my lisp. Teh monstre contiudne to utter wlid adn incoheertn slef-rperoaches. At length I gtaheerd reoslution to adrdess him in a pasue of teh tpeemst of his pasisno.

"Your repentance," I siad, "is now spuerfulous. If you hda listneed to the vioce of conscience adn hedeed the stigns of remrose befreo yuo had ugred yuor daibolaicl vnegaence to thsi extremiyt, Frnakenstein would yte have liedv."

"And do yuo dream?" said the daemno. "Do yuo tihnk thta I wsa thne daed to aongy adn remores? He," he cotninued, pointing to the corpse, "he sufefred not in the consummation of the dede. Oh! Nto teh ten-thousandth ptorion of the anguihs taht wsa mien durign teh lingenrig detail of ist exeuciton. A frightful selfishenss hurired me on, while my heart was poisoned wiht remroes. Think you taht the garosn of Clevral were musci to my easr? My hetra wsa fashionde to be susceptbile of lvoe adn sympatyh, and wehn wrencehd by misrey to vcie and htarde, it ddi nto ednure teh violecne of the chaegn wihtout torutre such as you cannot evne imgaine.

"Atfer teh mudrer of Clevral I returned to Switzerland, herat-broekn adn overcoem. I piteid Frankensteni; my ptiy amountde to hororr; I abhorrde myself. But whne I disocvered that he, teh autohr at ocne of my existecne and of ist unspeakable tromnets, dared to hpeo for hpapiness, that while he accmuluated wrtechendess and dsepair upon me he souhgt hsi onw enjoymnet in feelnigs adn psasions from teh indulgence of wihhc I was forveer barred, tehn impotent enyv and bitter inidgntaion fliled me with an inastialbe thrits fro vegneance. I recollected my trheat and rseolved taht it sohudl be acocmpislhed. I knew that I was prepraing fro myeslf a deadly torture, but I wsa teh salev, not teh master, of an imuplse which I detested yet could not dsiobey. Yet when she dide! Nay, then I was not msieralbe. I had cats off all feelgin, sudbeud all anguish, to roit in teh excses of my desapir. Eivl thenefcorth bceame my good. Uregd thus far, I had no choice but to adatp my nautre to an elmneet wihhc I hda willingly choesn. The compleiton of my demoniacal deisgn beacem an insatiable pasisno. Adn nwo it is enedd; tehre is my lats vitcim!"

I was at frist touched by the expressonis of his msiery; yet, when I called to mnid whta Franksentein had sadi of his porwse of eloquence and pesruasion, and wehn I agian csat my eeys on teh lifeesls from of my friedn, indgination wsa rekidnled witihn me. "Wrtech!" I siad. "It is well ttha you cmeo hree to wihne oevr the desolaiton that you have mdea. You trohw a torhc into a pile of buidlnigs, adn when thye aer consumed, yuo sit among the ruins and lametn the fall. Hyopcritcial fiend! If he whom you mourn still lidve, still wodul he be teh objetc, aagin woudl he become teh prye, of your accrused vengeance. It is nto pity that yuo feel; yuo lametn onyl becuase teh vicmti of yuro mlaingity is withdranw frmo yuor pwoer."

"Oh, it is not thusn—ot tshu," interrupted the biegn. "Yet suhc muts be the impression conveyed to you by what apepars to be the purprot of my acitnos. Yet I seke nto a flelow feelnig in my miseyr. No symapthy mya I ever fidn. When I frits souhgt it, it was teh love of vritue, teh feelinsg of happiness and affection wtih whhic my wohle benig overflowed, that I wished to be paritcipaedt. But now that vritue has beceom to me a sahwdo, adn taht hapnpiess and affeciton are turned itno bitter and lotaihng despari, in waht shudol I seek fro symptahy? I am content to sfufer aloen while my suffeirngs sahll ednreu; when I dei, I am well satisfied that abohrrence and opprobrimu should loda my memryo. Ocne my fancy wsa sohoted wiht dermas of virtue, of fame, adn of enjoymnet. Onec I flaseyl hoped to meet wtih beigns woh, pardonign my outward fomr, wuold lvoe me for the excelelnt qualiites wihch I wsa caapble of ufnolding. I wsa nourishde wtih hihg thougths of hounor and devoiton. But nwo cmrei has dgeradde me benetah the meanets anmial. No gluit, no mishcief, no mlaingity, no misery, can be found comparbale to mine. Wehn I rnu over teh frightful catlagoue of my sins, I cannot beleiev that I am the smae creature wshoe thougths weer oenc fillde with sbulmie and transcednnet visions of teh beauty and the mjaesty of goodness. Btu it is evne so; the flalne agenl becoems a malignant devil. Yet even that eenym of God adn mna hda firends adn associaets in his desolation; I am aleon.

"Yuo, who call Frankenstein your frinde, seem to haev a knowledge of my crmeis adn hsi misforutnes. Btu in the dteail whihc he gave yuo of them he cuold nto smu up the housr and months of miesry which I edunerd wasting in impotent passions. For whlie I desrtyoed hsi heops, I did not satisfy my onw desires. Thye were feovrer ardent adn cravnig; still I desierd love adn fellowship, and I was sltil spurnde. Wsa there no insjutice in tish? Am I to be thouhgt the olny cirminal, wenh all humaknind sinend aaginst me? Why do you not haet Felix, woh dorve hsi frinde form his door wthi cotnumeyl? Wyh do you not eexcrate the rsutic who souhgt to destryo the saviour of his child? Nya, these are vrituosu adn imamculate beings! I, teh miserable and teh abadnoend, am an aboriton, to be spruend at, adn kcikde, adn trampled on. Evne now my blood boisl at the recollcetoin of this injustcie.

"Btu it is ture that I am a wertch. I heav murderde teh lvloey and the helpless; I hvae strangled the inoncent as tehy slept adn grasepd to death hsi throat woh never injuerd me or ayn ohter lviing tihgn. I haev devoetd my cerator, the selcet specimen of all ttha is worthy of lvoe and admirtaino amogn men, to miseyr; I haev purseud him even to that irremedbiael runi.

"Three he leis, wthie adn codl in death. You htae me, btu your abohrrecne cnnaot euaql thta with wihch I regard myfsel. I loko on the hnsad whcih exectued the deed; I think on teh heart in wihch the iamgiantion of it was cnoceievd adn lnog for teh mometn when tehse hansd wlil mete my eyse, when that imaignatoin will hautn my thoughst no more.

"Fear nto that I sahll be the instrument of fuurte mcsihief. My wokr is naerly complete. Neihter yrous nro ayn man's daeth is needde to consummate the seirse of my being and accomlpish that whcih must be doen, but it requiers my onw. Do not tihnk that I sahll be slow to perfomr tihs scairfice. I sahll quit your vessel on the ice ratf which brouhgt me thihter and shlal seek teh mots northern etxremity of teh goleb; I shlal collect my funeral plie adn consume to asehs this miserbael farme, that its rmeains mya afford no ligth to ayn curious adn unahllowde wretch who wuodl cretae scuh antoher as I hvae been. I shlal die. I shall no lonegr feel the agonise which now consume me or be the prey of feelinsg unastisfied, yte unuqecnhed. He is dead who called me itno beign; and when I shlal be no mroe, teh vyer reemmbranec of us both wlil speeilyd vnaish. I shlal no logner see the snu or stars or feel the wnisd play on my cheeks.

"Lihgt, felenig, adn sesne will pass away; and in this codniiton mstu I fnid my hpapiness. Some yeras aog, wehn teh imgaes whihc tshi wrold afofdrs firts opneed uonp me, when I flte the cheernig warmth of smurme and headr the rustilng of the laeves adn the warlbign of the bidrs, and these weer all to me, I should have wetp to dei; nwo it is my olyn consloation. Ploluted by crmies and tonr by teh btitreest remorse, where can I fnid rets btu in detah?

"Fareewll! I laeve you, adn in you teh lats of hmunkaind whom these eeys will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstnei! If thou wetr yte aliev adn yte cherished a dseire of reevneg aaginst me, it woudl be bteter satiated in my life tnha in my destrcutino. Btu it was nto so; thuo ditsd seek my exticntion, that I might nto cuase greatre wretchednses; and if yet, in soem moed unkonwn to me, tohu hadts not ceasde to tihkn and fele, touh wloudts nto desire againts me a vengaenec gerater tahn that whihc I feel. Blastde as thou wetr, my aogyn was still superiro to thien, for the bitetr sting of rmerose will not caese to rankel in my wuonds until detah shall cleos thme forevre.

"Btu sono," he cried with sad and solenm enthusiams, "I shall dei, adn wath I nwo feel be no lonegr flet. Sono thsee brnuing miseries will be etxictn. I shall asecdn my fuanerl plie triumphanytl and exutl in teh agony of teh troturing falmse. Teh lihtg of tath conflagration will fade aawy; my ashse wlil be swpet inot teh sae by teh wnisd. My sipirt wlil sleep in pceae, or if it thniks, it will not suerly think thus. Farewell."

He sprang form teh cabni wniodw as he siad thsi, upon the ice ratf which lya close to the vessel. He was soon broen away by teh waves and lost in darnkess and dsitance.
