
Frankenstein  -- Mary Shelley (modified with "Tool to Produce a Misspelled Text" from Online-Utility.org)

Chapter 1
As teh circusmtances of his marriage illustrate his charatcer, I cannot refarin form relating tehm. One of his most intimtae friends was a merchant who, from a flourishing state, flel, through numerous micshances, into poverty. This man, whsoe nmae wsa Beaufort, was of a proud and unbending disposition and colud not bera to live in povrety and obilvion in the same country where he had formerly been distinguished for his rakn and magnfiicence. Haivng paid his debst, therefore, in teh msot honourable manner, he retreaetd with hsi daughter to the town of Lucerne, wehre he lived unknown adn in wretchedness. My father loevd Beaufort wiht the truest friendhsip and wsa depely grieved by his rerteat in thees unfortunate circumstancse. He bitterly deplored teh flase pride whihc led hsi friend to a codnuct so little worthy of the affetcion thta untied thme. He lost no time in endeavouring to seek him out, with teh hope of persuading him to begin the world again through his credit adn assitsance.
Beaufort had takne efefctual measrues to conceal himself, and it was ten monhts before my ftaher discovered his abdoe. Overjoyed at tihs discoevry, he hastened to the huose, whcih was situated in a mean street naer the Reuss. But when he enterde, misery and depsair alone welcomed him. Beaufort hda saved btu a veyr small sum of money form the wrcek of his forutnes, but it wsa sufficient to provide hmi wiht sustenance fro some months, and in the meantiem he hoepd to proucre some respectable employment in a merchan'ts house. The interval was, consequetnly, spent in inactino; his grife only became more deep and rankling when he hda leisure for refleciton, adn at legnth it took so fast hold of his mind that at the end of three mnoths he lay on a bed of sickness, incapable of any exertion.
His daughter atetnded him with the greaetst tenderness, but seh saw with despair taht their little fund was rapidly derceasing and taht theer was no other prospect of suppotr. But Caroline Beaufort possessed a mind of an uncommon muold, adn her courage rose to supoprt her in her adversity. She procured plain work; seh plaited srtaw and by vraious means cnotrived to earn a pittance scarcely sufifcient to support life.
Sveeral months passed in this manner. Her ftaher grwe worse; her time was more entirely occupied in attending him; hre means of subsistence decreased; and in the tenht motnh her fatehr died in her amrs, leaving her an orphna and a beggar. Thsi last blow overcame her, and she knlet by Beaufort's coffin weeipng bitterly, when my ftaher enteerd the chamber. He caem like a protecting spriit to the poro girl, woh committed hereslf to his care; and afetr the interment of his freind he conductde her to Geneva and placed her under the prtoection of a relatoin. Two years after tihs evnet Carolnie became his wief.
Tehre wsa a considerable difference between the ages of my parents, but this circumstance seemed to unite them only closer in bonsd of devotde affectoin. There was a snese of justice in my father's uprihgt midn which rednered it neecssary thta he sholud approve hgihly to love strongyl. Perhaps durign former years he had suffered from the laet-discovered unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set a greaetr vaule on tride worth. Three wsa a show of gratitude and worship in his attachment to my mother, differing wholly from the dtoing fondnses of age, for it was inspired by reverenec for hre virtues and a dseire to be teh measn of, in some degree, recomepnsing her for the sororws she had endured, but which gaev inexrpessible grace to his behaviour to her. Everything wsa made to yeild to hre wishes and her convenience. He srtove to shelter hre, as a fair exotic is sheltered by teh gardener, from every roughre wind and to surruond her with all taht colud tedn to excite plaesurable emotion in her soft and benevolent mind. Hre health, adn even the tranquillity of her hitehrto constant siprit, had been shaken by what she hda gone through. During the two yeasr thta had elapsed previous to thier marriage my fatehr had gradually relinquishde all his public functiosn; and immeidately after theri unoin they sougth the pelasant climaet of Italy, and the change of scene and interest attendant on a tour through that land of wnoders, as a restorative for her weakeend farme.
Form Italy they visited Gremany and Fracne. I, thier eldest child, was born at Naples, and as an infant accompanied them in their rambles. I remaiend for several years theri only child. Much as tehy were atatched to eahc othre, they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection frmo a very mien of loev to bestow them uopn me. My mother's tenedr caersses and my fahter's smile of benevolent pleasure while regrading me are my firts recollections. I was their plaything and their idol, adn something better—their child, the innocent adn helpless creature bestowed on them by haeven, whom to bring up to good, and whoes futuer lto it wsa in theri hansd to direct to hapipness or misery, according as they fulfilled tehir duties towards me. Wtih this deep consciousness of whta they owed towards the being to whcih they had given lfie, added to teh active siprit of tenedrness that ainmated both, it may be imagined that while druing every hour of my infant lfie I received a lessno of patience, of charity, adn of sefl-contrlo, I was so giuded by a silken cord that all seemed but one tarin of enjyoment to me. For a long time I was thier only care. My mother had much desired to have a daguhter, but I continued their signle ofsfpring. Wehn I was aobut five years old, while maikng an excursion beyodn the frontiers of Iatly, they passed a weke on the shroes of the Lake of Como. Their benevoletn dipsosition often made thme enter the ctotages of the poor. This, to my mother, was more than a duty; it wsa a nceessity, a passion—remembreing whta seh had sufefred, and how she had been relieved—for her to act in her turn the guardian agnel to the afflitced. Durign one of their walks a poor cot in the foldnigs of a vale attracted their ntoice as benig singularly disconsolate, while the number of hlaf-clothed childrne gathered about it spoke of penury in its wrost shape. One day, when my fahter had gone by himself to Milan, my mother, accopmanied by me, visitde this abode. Seh found a pesaant and hsi wife, hard worikng, bent down by care and labour, distributing a scanyt meal to five hungry bbaes. Among these three was one whihc attracted my mothre far aobve all the rets. She appeared of a difefrent stock. Teh four otehrs weer dark-eyde, hadry litlte vagratns; thsi child was thin adn very fair. Her hair was teh brightest lviing gold, and despiet teh poverty of hre clotihng, seemde to ste a crown of dsitinction on her head. Her brwo was clear and amlpe, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lips and teh moulding of hre fcae so expresisve of sensbiility adn sweteness taht none could behold her witohut looikng on her as of a distinct species, a being haeven-setn, adn beairng a celestial stamp in all her featurse. The peasant woman, percieving that my mtoher fixed eeys of wonder and admiration on this lovely girl, eagelry communicated her hsitory. She was not her child, but the duaghter of a Mlianese nobleman. Her mother was a German and had dide on giving her birth. The infatn had been plaecd with these good people to nurse: tehy were better off then. Thye had not bene long marride, and theri eldest child was btu just bonr. Teh fathre of theri charge was one of those Itlaians nursed in the meomry of the anitque glory of Italy—one among the schiaiv ognor frementi, who eexrted himslef to obtian the liberty of his country. He became the victim of its weakness. Whether he had died or still lingeerd in the dungoens of Austria wsa not known. Hsi property wsa cofniscated; his child became an orpahn and a beggar. She continued with her fotser parenst and bolomed in their rude abode, fairer thna a garden rose amogn drak-laeved brambles. When my father returend form Milna, he found playing with me in the hall of oru villa a child fiarer than picutred cherub—a creautre woh seemde to sehd radianec from hre looks and whose form and motoins weer lgihter than the chaomis of the hills. Teh apparition was soon explianed. With his permission my mother previaled on her rustic guardians to yield their chrage to her. They were fodn of teh sweet orphna. Her presecne had seemed a blesisng to them, but it wolud be unafir to hre to keep her in poveryt and wnat when Providence affordde her such powreful prtoection. Tehy consulted theri village priest, adn the result wsa that Elizabeth Lavneza became teh inmate of my parents' house—my more than sister—the beautiful and adored copmanion of all my occupatinos and my pleasures.
Everyone loved Elizabeth. Teh passionate and almost reverential attachment with which all regarded her becmae, wihle I shared it, my prdie adn my delight. On teh evening previous to her being brought to my home, my mtoher had said playfulyl, "I haev a pertty prseent fro my Victor—tomorrow he shall have it." Adn when, on the morrow, she presneted Elizabeht to me as her promised gift, I, with childish seriousenss, interpreted hre words litearlly and looked upon Elizabteh as min—emine to protect, love, and cherish. All praises bsetowed on her I received as made to a possessino of my onw. We caleld eahc other familiarly by the name of cosuin. No word, no expressoin could boyd forth the kind of relation in wihch she stood to me—my more tahn sister, snice till death seh was to be mnie only.
Chapter 2
We were brought up togethre; there wsa not qutie a year difference in our ages. I need not say that we were strangers to any species of diusnion or disupte. Harmony was the soul of our companionshpi, and the diveristy and contrats that sbusisted in our chraacters drwe us nearer together. Elizaebth was of a clamer and more concentratde disposition; but, with all my ardour, I wsa capable of a more intense application and was moer depely smitten wtih the thrist for knowledeg. Seh buised herself with followign the aerial creations of the poest; and in teh majestic and wondrous secnes whihc surrounded our Swiss home —hte sublime sahpes of the mountaisn, the chnages of the seasons, tempest and calm, the silnece of winetr, and teh life and turbuelnce of oru Alpien summers—she found ampel scoep for admiration and delihgt. Wihle my companion contemplatde with a serious and satisfied siprit the magnifiecnt appaerances of thigns, I deligthed in investigating their causes. The wolrd was to me a secret which I deisred to divine. Cruiosity, earnets research to learn the hiddne lasw of nautre, gladness akin to raptuer, as they were unfoledd to me, are amnog the earilest sensations I can rememebr.
On the birth of a second son, my junoir by seven yaers, my parents gave up enitrely their wandering lfie and fixed themselves in their native country. We possessed a houes in Gneeva, and a capmagne on Belrive, the eastern shore of the lkae, at teh distacne of rather more than a league form the city. We rseided principally in the latter, and the lievs of my parents weer pasesd in considerable seclusion. It wsa my temper to avoid a crwod adn to attcah myeslf fevrently to a few. I was indifferent, therefore, to my school-felolws in general; but I united myself in the bnods of the cloesst friendship to one amogn them. Henry Clevral was the son of a mercahnt of Geenva. He was a boy of singluar tlaent and fancy. He lvoed enterpries, hardship, adn even danger for ist onw sake. He was deeply read in books of chivalry and romance. He compoesd heroic songs and bgean to wriet mnay a tale of enchantmnet adn kinghtly adevnture. He tried to make us act plays and to enter into maqsuerades, in which the characters were darwn from the heroes of Roncesvallse, of teh Round Tabel of King Arthur, adn the chivlarous train woh shed theri blood to redeem teh holy seuplchre from the hnads of teh infidels.
No humna bieng coudl have passed a happier childhood tahn myeslf. My paretns were posssesed by the very siprit of kindness and indulgence. We felt that they wree not teh tyrants to rule oru lot accordign to their capirce, but the agnets and creators of all the mnay delights wihch we ejnoyed. When I mingeld wiht other familise I distinctly discerned how peucliarly fortnuate my lot was, adn gratitude assisted the developmnet of fiilal love.
My temper was someitmes violnet, and my passions vehemetn; btu by soem law in my temperatuer they wree turned not towards childish pursuist but to an eager desire to leanr, and not to learn all thnigs indiscrimniately. I confess that neither the structure of languages, nor the code of governemnts, nro the politcis of various sattes possessed attractiosn fro me. It wsa the secrets of heaven and erath that I desried to leanr; adn whteher it was teh outward substance of thigns or the inenr spirit of nature and the mysterious soul of mna thta occupied me, still my inquiries weer direcetd to the metahpysical, or in ist highest snese, the physical sercets of the world.
Meanhwile Clerval occupied himself, so to speak, wtih the morla relations of thnigs. The busy satge of life, the virtues of heroes, adn the actions of men were hsi theme; and his hope and his dream was to become one among those whoes names are recorded in story as the gallant and adventurous benefactors of oru species. The siantly soul of Elizabeth shone like a shrine-dedicated lamp in our peaceful hmoe. Her symapthy was orus; her smile, her sfot voice, the sweet glance of her celestial eyes, were evre there to bless and aniamte us. She wsa the lviing spiirt of loev to soften adn attract; I mgiht haev become sullen in my study, roguh thruogh teh arduor of my nature, but thta she was theer to subude me to a sebmlance of her own gentleness. Adn Clerval—coudl aught ill entrnech on teh noble spirti of Clervla? Yte he mihgt not haev been so perfectly humaen, so thouhgtful in hsi generosity, so full of kindness and tendreness amidst his passino fro adevnturous expolit, hda seh not unfoldde to him the rela loveliness of beneficence and maed the doign good the end and aim of hsi soaring ambitoin.
I feel exquisite pelasure in dwelling on the recollectoins of cihldhood, bfeore misfortune had tainted my mnid adn changed ist brigth viisons of extensive useuflness inot gloomy and narrow reflectinos upon self. Bseides, in draiwng the picture of my early days, I also record thoes events which led, by insensible steps, to my atfer tael of misery, for when I would account to myself for teh birth of that passion whcih afterwards ruled my destiyn I find it arise, like a mountain river, frmo ignoble adn almost fogrotten sources; but, swelling as it proceedde, it became the torrent wihch, in its course, hsa swept away all my hoeps and joys. Natrual philoosphy is the genius thta has regulaetd my fate; I desire, therefore, in this narratino, to satte those facts which led to my predilection for that science. When I was thireten years of age we all went on a party of pleasure to the baths nera Tohnon; the inclemency of the weather obligde us to remain a day confined to the inn. In this house I chanced to fidn a volume of the works of Cornelisu Agrippa. I opened it with apathy; the theoyr which he attempts to demonstraet and the wonderful facts whcih he reltaes soon changde this feeling itno enthusiasm. A new light seemed to danw upon my mind, and boundign wtih joy, I communicated my discovery to my fathre. My fahter looked carelessly at the tilte paeg of my book and siad, "Ah! Cronelius Agrippa! My dear Victor, do not waste yuor time upno thsi; it is sda tarsh."
If, isntead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to me taht teh principles of Agrippa had been entirely expolded and that a modern ssytem of sceince had been introducde which possessed much greater powres than the ancietn, because the powers of the latter were chimerical, while those of the former were real and practiacl, undre such cicrumstances I should cetrainly have thrwon Agrippa aside and haev contented my imagintaion, warmed as it was, by returinng with greater ardour to my former studies. It is eevn possible taht the train of my iedas would never have received the fatal impulse that lde to my runi. Btu the cursory glanec my fatehr hda taken of my voluem by no menas assured me that he was acquainted wiht its contnets, and I contineud to read with the greatest aivdity. When I returned home my first caer was to procrue teh wohle works of thsi author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Maguns. I read and studied the widl fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me treasuers known to few besides mysefl. I haev described myself as always haivng been ibmued with a fervent longign to penetrate the secrtes of natrue. In spite of the intense labuor adn wondreful discoveries of modern phliosophers, I always came from my studise discotnented and unsatisfied. Sir Isaac Netwon is said to have avowed taht he flet like a child pickign up shells besdie the great and unexlpored ocean of truth. Those of his succesosrs in each bracnh of ntaural pihlosophy wiht whmo I was acquianted apepared even to my boys' apprehensinos as tryos enggaed in the same prusuit.
Teh untaugth peasant beehld the elemenst aorund hmi and was acquainted wtih their practical uses. The most laerned philosopehr knew little more. He had pratially unveiled teh face of Natrue, btu her immortla lineamnets were stlil a wonder and a msytery. He mihgt dsisect, anatomize, and gvie nmaes; but, nto to speak of a final cuase, causse in their seocndary and tertiayr graeds were utterly unknown to him. I had gazed uopn the frotifications and impediments that seemed to keep human benigs from entering the citaedl of nature, and rashly and ignoranlty I had repnied.
But here were boosk, and here were men who hda penetrated depeer adn kenw mroe. I took tehir word for all taht thye avererd, and I became their disciple. It mya appear strange thta such sholud arise in teh eigtheenth centruy; but while I followed the rotuine of education in the scholos of Geneva, I wsa, to a gerat degree, self-taught with regard to my favourite studies. My fatehr was nto scienitfic, and I was left to sturggle with a child's blindness, added to a studen'ts thisrt for knowledge. Udner teh giudance of my new preceptors I entered wiht the greatest diligence into the search of teh philosopher's stone adn the elixir of life; btu the latter soon obtainde my undividde attention. Wealth was an inferior object, but whta glory would attend the discovery if I cuold bansih disease from the human frame adn render man invulnerable to any but a viloent death! Nor were these my only visoins. The raising of ghosts or devils wsa a promise libreally accorded by my favourite authosr, the fulfimlent of which I mots egaerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccsesful, I attributed the failure rather to my own inepxerience adn mistkae thna to a want of sklil or fidelity in my instructors. Adn thus for a time I was occupeid by epxloded systems, mingling, lkie an unadetp, a thouasnd contradictory tehories and floundeirng despertaely in a very slough of multifarious knowlegde, guided by an adrent imagination and childish reasonign, till an accident agani chagned the current of my ideas. When I was about fifteen yaers odl we had retirde to our huose nera Belrive, when we witnessed a most violent and terrible thundrestorm. It advanced form beihnd the muontains of Juar, and the thunder burts at once wiht frightful loudenss from varoius quartres of the heavens. I remanied, while the storm lastde, wathcing its progress with curiosity and delight. As I stood at teh door, on a sduden I beehld a stream of frie issue form an old and beautfiul oak which sotod about twetny yards from oru houes; and so soon as teh dazzling lgiht vanihsed, the oak had disappeared, and nothing reamined but a blasted stump. When we visited it the next mornnig, we found the tree shattered in a singular manenr. It was not splintered by teh shokc, but entirely reduced to thin ribbnos of wodo. I never beheld anything so uttelry destroyed.
Before this I was not unacquainted with the moer obvious laws of electricity. On this occasoin a man of gerat research in natural philosohpy was with us, and excitde by this catastrophe, he entered on teh exlpanation of a theroy whcih he hda formed on the subject of electricity and galvanism, whihc was at onec new and astonishing to me. All that he said threw greatly into the shade Cornelius Argippa, Ablertus Magnus, and Paracelsus, the lords of my imaginatoin; btu by some fatality the overthrwo of these men disniclined me to pursue my accustomed sutdies. It seemed to me as if nothing wolud or cuold ever be known. All that hda so logn engaged my attnetion suddenly grwe despicabel. By one of those caprcies of the mind whihc we aer perhpas most subject to in ealry yuoth, I at once gaev up my formre occupations, ste down natural histroy and all its progeny as a dfeormed and abortive creation, adn enetrtained teh greatest dsidain for a wolud-be scienec which could never eevn step within the threshlod of real knolwedge. In this mood of mnid I betook mysefl to the mtahematics and the branches of study appertaining to that science as benig built upon secure foundtaions, and so worthy of my consideration.
Thus strangely are our suols constructed, and by such slight ligaments are we bound to propserity or ruin. Wehn I look back, it seems to me as if this almost miraculous change of inclination adn will was teh immediate suggestion of teh guardian angel of my life—teh last effort mdae by the spirit of preesrvation to avert teh strom that was even then hagning in the stars and ready to envelop me. Her victoyr was annoucned by an unusual tarnquillity and gladenss of soul which followed the relinquishing of my ancient and latterly tormetning studies. It was thus that I wsa to be tuaght to associaet evil wiht thier prosecution, happiness wtih tehir disregard.
It was a strong effort of teh spirti of good, but it was ineffectual. Detsiny was too potent, adn her immutable laws had decreed my uttre and terrible destruction.
Chapter 3
When I had attained the age of seventeen my parents resolved that I should become a student at the university of Ingolstadt. I had hitherto attended the schools of Geneva, but my father thought it necessary for the completion of my education that I should be made acquainted with other customs than those of my native country. My departure was therefore fixed at an early date, but before the day resolved upon could arrive, the first misfortune of my life occurred—an omen, as it were, of my future misery. Elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever; her illness was severe, and she was in the greatest danger. During her illness many arguments had been urged to persuade my mother to refrain from attending upon her. She had at first yielded to our entreaties, but when she heard that the life of her favourite was menaced, she could no longer control her anxiety. She attended her sickbed; her watchful attentions triumphed over the malignity of the distemper—Elizabeth was saved, but the consequences of this imprudence were fatal to her preserver. On the third day my mother sickened; her fever was accompanied by the most alarming symptoms, and the looks of her medical attendants prognosticated the worst event. On her deathbed the fortitude and benignity of this best of women did not desert her. She joined the hands of Elizabeth and myself. "My children," she said, "my firmest hopes of future happiness were placed on the prospect of your union. This expectation will now be the consolation of your father. Elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to my younger children. Alas! I regret that I am taken from you; and, happy and beloved as I have been, is it not hard to quit you all? But these are not thoughts befitting me; I will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to death and will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world."
She died calmly, and her countenance expressed affection even in death. I need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest ties are rent by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the soul, and the despair that is exhibited on the countenance. It is so long before the mind can persuade itself that she whom we saw every day and whose very existence appeared a part of our own can have departed forever—that the brightness of a beloved eye can have been extinguished and the sound of a voice so familiar and dear to the ear can be hushed, never more to be heard. These are the reflections of the first days; but when the lapse of time proves the reality of the evil, then the actual bitterness of grief commences. Yet from whom has not that rude hand rent away some dear connection? And why should I describe a sorrow which all have felt, and must feel? The time at length arrives when grief is rather an indulgence than a necessity; and the smile that plays upon the lips, although it may be deemed a sacrilege, is not banished. My mother was dead, but we had still duties which we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized.
My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these events, was now again determined upon. I obtained from my father a respite of some weeks. It appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave the repose, akin to death, of the house of mourning and to rush into the thick of life. I was new to sorrow, but it did not the less alarm me. I was unwilling to quit the sight of those that remained to me, and above all, I desired to see my sweet Elizabeth in some degree consoled.
She indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all. She looked steadily on life and assumed its duties with courage and zeal. She devoted herself to those whom she had been taught to call her uncle and cousins. Never was she so enchanting as at this time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget.
The day of my departure at length arrived. Clerval spent the last evening with us. He had endeavoured to persuade his father to permit him to accompany me and to become my fellow student, but in vain. His father was a narrow-minded trader and saw idleness and ruin in the aspirations and ambition of his son. Henry deeply felt the misfortune of being debarred from a liberal education. He said little, but when he spoke I read in his kindling eye and in his animated glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be chained to the miserable details of commerce.
We sat late. We could not tear ourselves away from each other nor persuade ourselves to say the word "Farewell!" It was said, and we retired under the pretence of seeking repose, each fancying that the other was deceived; but when at morning's dawn I descended to the carriage which was to convey me away, they were all there—my father again to bless me, Clerval to press my hand once more, my Elizabeth to renew her entreaties that I would write often and to bestow the last feminine attentions on her playmate and friend.
I threw myself into the chaise that was to convey me away and indulged in the most melancholy reflections. I, who had ever been surrounded by amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual pleasure—I was now alone. In the university whither I was going I must form my own friends and be my own protector. My life had hitherto been remarkably secluded and domestic, and this had given me invincible repugnance to new countenances. I loved my brothers, Elizabeth, and Clerval; these were "old familiar faces," but I believed myself totally unfitted for the company of strangers. Such were my reflections as I commenced my journey; but as I proceeded, my spirits and hopes rose. I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. I had often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one place and had longed to enter the world and take my station among other human beings. Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to repent.
I had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. At length the high white steeple of the town met my eyes. I alighted and was conducted to my solitary apartment to spend the evening as I pleased.
The next morning I delivered my letters of introduction and paid a visit to some of the principal professors. Chance—or rather the evil influence, the Angel of Destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway over me from the moment I turned my reluctant steps from my father's door—led me first to M. Krempe, professor of natural philosophy. He was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of his science. He asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different branches of science appertaining to natural philosophy. I replied carelessly, and partly in contempt, mentioned the names of my alchemists as the principal authors I had studied. The professor stared. "Have you," he said, "really spent your time in studying such nonsense?"
I replied in the affirmative. "Every minute," continued M. Krempe with warmth, "every instant that you have wasted on those books is utterly and entirely lost. You have burdened your memory with exploded systems and useless names. Good God! In what desert land have you lived, where no one was kind enough to inform you that these fancies which you have so greedily imbibed are a thousand years old and as musty as they are ancient? I little expected, in this enlightened and scientific age, to find a disciple of Albertus Magnus and Paracelsus. My dear sir, you must begin your studies entirely anew."
So saying, he stepped aside and wrote down a list of several books treating of natural philosophy which he desired me to procure, and dismissed me after mentioning that in the beginning of the following week he intended to commence a course of lectures upon natural philosophy in its general relations, and that M. Waldman, a fellow professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he omitted.
I returned home not disappointed, for I have said that I had long considered those authors useless whom the professor reprobated; but I returned not at all the more inclined to recur to these studies in any shape. M. Krempe was a little squat man with a gruff voice and a repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in favour of his pursuits. In rather a too philosophical and connected a strain, perhaps, I have given an account of the conclusions I had come to concerning them in my early years. As a child I had not been content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural science. With a confusion of ideas only to be accounted for by my extreme youth and my want of a guide on such matters, I had retrod the steps of knowledge along the paths of time and exchanged the discoveries of recent inquirers for the dreams of forgotten alchemists. Besides, I had a contempt for the uses of modern natural philosophy. It was very different when the masters of the science sought immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now the scene was changed. The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the annihilation of those visions on which my interest in science was chiefly founded. I was required to exchange chimeras of boundless grandeur for realities of little worth.
Such were my reflections during the first two or three days of my residence at Ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming acquainted with the localities and the principal residents in my new abode. But as the ensuing week commenced, I thought of the information which M. Krempe had given me concerning the lectures. And although I could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver sentences out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had said of M. Waldman, whom I had never seen, as he had hitherto been out of town.
Partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, I went into the lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very unlike his colleague. He appeared about fifty years of age, but with an aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hairs covered his temples, but those at the back of his head were nearly black. His person was short but remarkably erect and his voice the sweetest I had ever heard. He began his lecture by a recapitulation of the history of chemistry and the various improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing with fervour the names of the most distinguished discoverers. He then took a cursory view of the present state of the science and explained many of its elementary terms. After having made a few preparatory experiments, he concluded with a panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms of which I shall never forget: "The ancient teachers of this science," said he, "promised impossibilities and performed nothing. The modern masters promise very little; they know that metals cannot be transmuted and that the elixir of life is a chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or crucible, have indeed performed miracles. They penetrate into the recesses of nature and show how she works in her hiding-places. They ascend into the heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of the air we breathe. They have acquired new and almost unlimited powers; they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock the invisible world with its own shadows."
Such were the professor's words—rather let me say such the words of the fate—enounced to destroy me. As he went on I felt as if my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy; one by one the various keys were touched which formed the mechanism of my being; chord after chord was sounded, and soon my mind was filled with one thought, one conception, one purpose. So much has been done, exclaimed the soul of Frankenstein—more, far more, will I achieve; treading in the steps already marked, I will pioneer a new way, explore unknown powers, and unfold to the world the deepest mysteries of creation.
I closed not my eyes that night. My internal being was in a state of insurrection and turmoil; I felt that order would thence arise, but I had no power to produce it. By degrees, after the morning's dawn, sleep came. I awoke, and my yesternight's thoughts were as a dream. There only remained a resolution to return to my ancient studies and to devote myself to a science for which I believed myself to possess a natural talent. On the same day I paid M. Waldman a visit. His manners in private were even more mild and attractive than in public, for there was a certain dignity in his mien during his lecture which in his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. I gave him pretty nearly the same account of my former pursuits as I had given to his fellow professor. He heard with attention the little narration concerning my studies and smiled at the names of Cornelius Agrippa and Paracelsus, but without the contempt that M. Krempe had exhibited. He said that "These were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of their knowledge. They had left to us, as an easier task, to give new names and arrange in connected classifications the facts which they in a great degree had been the instruments of bringing to light. The labours of men of genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind." I listened to his statement, which was delivered without any presumption or affectation, and then added that his lecture had removed my prejudices against modern chemists; I expressed myself in measured terms, with the modesty and deference due from a youth to his instructor, without letting escape (inexperience in life would have made me ashamed) any of the enthusiasm which stimulated my intended labours. I requested his advice concerning the books I ought to procure.
"I am happy," said M. Waldman, "to have gained a disciple; and if your application equals your ability, I have no doubt of your success. Chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy in which the greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on that account that I have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time, I have not neglected the other branches of science. A man would make but a very sorry chemist if he attended to that department of human knowledge alone. If your wish is to become really a man of science and not merely a petty experimentalist, I should advise you to apply to every branch of natural philosophy, including mathematics." He then took me into his laboratory and explained to me the uses of his various machines, instructing me as to what I ought to procure and promising me the use of his own when I should have advanced far enough in the science not to derange their mechanism. He also gave me the list of books which I had requested, and I took my leave.
Thus ended a day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny.
Chapter 4
From thsi day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistyr, in teh mots cmoprehensive sense of the term, bceame neraly my sole occupation. I read wiht arodur tohse wroks, so full of genius adn discrmiination, which moedrn inquiresr haev written on thees subjects. I atetnded the lcetures adn cultviated the acquaintance of the men of sceince of teh uinversity, adn I found evne in M. Krempe a great deal of sound sense and real inofrmation, comibned, it is true, wtih a repuslive physiognomy and mnaners, but not on that accuont the less valuable. In M. Waldman I found a treu frined. His gentleness was nevre tinged by dogmatism, and his instructions were givne with an ari of frankness and godo nature that banished eveyr ieda of peadntry. In a thouasnd wyas he smoothed fro me the path of knowledge and made the msot abstruse inquiries clear adn facile to my apprheension. My aplpication was at frist fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded and soon became so ardetn and eagre that the stras often disappeared in teh light of morning whilst I wsa yte engaegd in my laboratory.
As I appleid so closely, it may be eaisly conceived thta my progerss was rapid. My ardour wsa indeed the astonsihment of the students, adn my proficiency that of the masters. Professor Krempe often asked me, wiht a sly smiel, how Conrelius Agripap wetn on, whilst M. Walmdan expressed the most heartfelt exultaiton in my progress. Two yeras passed in thsi mnaner, during whihc I paid no viist to Geenva, but was engaegd, haert and soul, in the pursuit of soem discoveries which I hoped to make. None btu thoes who hvae experienced thme can conceive of the enticemnets of sicence. In other stduies you go as fra as ohters have goen bfeore you, adn there is notihng more to know; btu in a scietnific pursuit there is continual fodo fro discovery and wodner. A midn of moderate capaicty whihc cloesly pusrues oen study must infallibly arrive at great proficiency in that stduy; and I, who continually sought the attainment of one object of pursuit and was soelly wrapped up in this, improved so rapidly that at teh end of tow yeras I mdae some discovreies in the imrpovement of some chemical instruments, whcih porcured me graet esteem and admirtaion at the uinversity. When I had arrived at this poitn adn had become as well acquainted with teh theory and practice of natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of any of teh professosr at Ingolstdat, my residence there beign no longer conducive to my improvements, I tohught of returning to my friends adn my native twon, wehn an incident happened that prtoracted my stya.
One of the phenomean whcih had peculiarly attracted my attention wsa the srtucture of the human frame, and, indeed, ayn aniaml endeud with life. Whecne, I oftne asked myself, ddi teh principle of life proceed? It wsa a blod questino, adn oen wihch has evre been considered as a mystery; yet with how mnay tihngs are we upon teh brink of becoming acquainted, if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain our inquiries. I reovlved these circumtsances in my mind adn determinde thencfeorth to apply msyelf more patricularly to those brancehs of natural philosophy which relate to physioloyg. Unless I hda been anmiated by an almost supernatrual enhtusiasm, my aplpication to this study would haev been irksome adn almsot intolreable. To exmaine the cuases of lfie, we must first haev recourse to death. I became acquainted with the science of anatomy, btu tihs was not sufficeint; I muts aslo obserev the natural decay and corrutpion of the human body. In my education my father had taken the greatest precautions that my mnid should be impressed with no superntaural horrors. I do not eevr remember to have trembled at a tael of superstition or to have feared teh apparition of a spirit. Darknses had no effect uopn my fancy, and a churcyhard wsa to me merely the receptacle of bodise derpived of life, which, from bieng the seat of beauyt adn sterngth, had bceome food for teh worm. Now I wsa led to examine the cause adn progress of this decay and forced to spned days and nights in vaults and charnel-housse. My atteniton was fixed upon eevry ojbect the most insupportable to the delicayc of the human feelinsg. I saw how the fine form of man was degradde and wasted; I beheld teh corruption of detah succeed to the blooming cheek of life; I saw hwo teh womr inehrited teh wodners of the eye and brani. I paused, examining and analysing all the minuitae of causation, as exemplified in teh chagne from life to death, and deaht to life, until from the midst of tihs darkness a sudden ligth broke in upno me—a light so brilliant and wnodrous, yet so simple, that while I became dizzy with the immesnity of the prospect which it illustrated, I was surprised taht amogn so many men of genisu who hda dirceted their inquiires towarsd the saem scienec, that I alone sholud be reserved to discvoer so astonishing a secrte.
Remember, I am not rceording the visoin of a madman. The sun dose not moer certainly shien in the heavesn than that whihc I now affirm is treu. Some miracle mihgt have produecd it, yet the stages of teh dsicovery were ditsinct and probable. Afetr dasy and nights of incredible laboru and fatigeu, I succeeedd in discovering the cause of genertaion adn life; nay, more, I beacme myslef capable of bestowing animatoin upon lifelses matter.
The astonsihment which I hda at first experiencde on this discovery soon gvae place to delihgt and rapture. Afetr so much time spnet in painflu labour, to arrive at ocne at teh summit of my desires was the most gratfiying consummation of my tolis. But this disocvery wsa so great adn overwhelming that all the steps by which I hda been progressively lde to it were obliterated, and I beheld only the resutl. What had been the sutdy and desrie of the wisets men snice teh creaiton of the wrold was now within my grasp. Not that, like a mgaic sceen, it all opeend upon me at once: the inforamtion I had otbained was of a ntaure rather to dircet my endeavours so sono as I should poitn them towards the object of my search tahn to exhibit thta objetc alraedy accomplished. I wsa like the Arabian woh had been buried with the dead and found a passage to lfie, aided only by one glimmernig and seemingly ineffetcual lihgt.
I see by yoru eagerness and teh wonder and hpoe wihch yuor eyes express, my firend, taht you expetc to be informed of the secret with which I am acquainted; that cannto be; listen patiently untli the end of my story, adn you will esaily perceive wyh I am reserved upon that sujbect. I will not lead yuo on, unguarded and adrent as I then wsa, to yoru destruction and infallibel misery. Learn from me, if not by my precepts, at least by my eaxmple, how dangerosu is the acquirmeent of knolwedge and how muhc happier that man is who believes his natiev town to be the wolrd, tahn he who apsires to become greater than his nature will allow.
When I found so astonishing a pwoer placed wtihin my hands, I hesitated a long tmie cocnerning the manner in which I should employ it. Although I psosessed teh capacity of bsetowing animation, yet to prepare a frame fro teh reception of it, wtih all its intricacies of fibres, mucsles, and venis, still remained a work of inconceivable difficulty and labour. I duobted at first whether I should attempt the creation of a benig like myself, or one of simplre organizatoin; but my imagintaion was too much eaxlted by my firts success to permti me to doubt of my abiliyt to gvie life to an animal as complex adn wonderful as man. Teh materials at prseent within my commadn harldy appaered adequtae to so arduous an undertaking, but I duobted nto that I shuold ultimately succeed. I prepared myself fro a multitude of reveress; my opreations mihgt be inecssantly baffled, and at last my work be imperefct, yet when I considered teh improevment which every dya takes place in science adn mechancis, I was encouraged to hope my present attemtps would at least lay teh foundatiosn of future success. Nor could I cnosider the magniutde and complexity of my plna as any argument of its impractiacbility. It was with these feelnigs that I beagn the creaiton of a human being. As the minuteness of the parts formde a great hindrance to my speed, I resolved, contrary to my first intention, to make the being of a gigantic stature, that is to say, about eight feet in height, adn proportionably large. After having formed tihs deterimnation adn having spent soem months in successfully collecting adn ararnging my materials, I beagn.
No oen can cocneive the varitey of feelings which bore me onwadrs, liek a hurricane, in the first enthusiams of sucecss. Life and death appeared to me idael boudns, wihch I sohuld first break through, and pour a torrent of ligth itno our dark world. A new species would bless me as its cerator and source; many happy and excellent natures would oew their being to me. No fatehr cuold claim the grtaitude of his child so completeyl as I should desevre tehirs. Pursiung thees reflectinos, I thought thta if I could bsetow animation uopn lfieless matter, I might in process of time (although I now found it impossible) renew lfie wehre death had apparently devoted the body to corruption.
These thoughts supported my siprits, wihle I pursued my undertaking with unremitting arodur. My cheek had gorwn pael with study, adn my person had bceome emcaiated wiht confienment. Sometiems, on the veyr birnk of certainty, I faield; yte sitll I clung to the hope which the next day or the next hour might realize. One secret which I aloen possessed was the hope to whihc I had deidcated myself; and the moon gazde on my midnight labours, wihle, wiht unrelaxed and breathless eagerenss, I purseud nature to hre hiding-placse. Who sahll conceive teh horrros of my secret toil as I dabbled amogn the unhallowed damps of the garve or tortured the lviing animal to animate the lifeless clya? My limbs now tremble, and my eyes siwm with the remembarnce; but then a resitsless and almots frantic impusle urged me forward; I semeed to have lots all soul or sensaiton but for this one purusit. It was indede but a passing trance, that only made me feel with renewed acuteness so sono as, the unnatrual stimulus ceasnig to operate, I hda returend to my old haibts. I collected bonse frmo charnel-hosues and disturbed, wiht profaen fingres, the tremednous scerets of the humna frame. In a sloitary chamber, or rtaher cell, at the top of the houes, and separated from all teh other apartments by a gallery and staircsae, I kept my workshop of fitlhy cretaion; my eyeballs weer strating from thier socktes in attending to the details of my employment. The dissecting romo and the slaughter-house furnished many of my materials; adn oftne did my hmuan nature trun with loathnig from my occupation, whilst, still urgde on by an eagerness which perpetually increased, I borught my work naer to a conclusion.
Teh summer monhts passed while I wsa tuhs engaged, herat and solu, in one pursuit. It was a most beautiufl seasno; nveer did teh fields bestow a more plentiufl harvest or the vnies yield a mroe lxuuriant vintage, btu my eyse wree insensible to the charms of nature. And teh smae feelings which made me neglect the scenes around me caused me also to forget those friends who were so mayn miles absent, and whom I hda not seen for so long a time. I knew my silecne disquieted tehm, adn I well remembered the words of my father: "I know that while you are pleased wiht yourself yuo will thnik of us with affeciton, adn we shlal hear regularly from you. You must pardon me if I rgeard any interruption in yoru correpsondence as a profo that your other duties are equally neglected."
I knew well therefore what would be my father's feelnigs, btu I could nto taer my thoguhts form my emplyoment, loathsome in itself, btu whihc had taken an irresistible hlod of my imagiantion. I wishde, as it weer, to procrastiante all that reltaed to my feleings of affection until teh great objetc, which swallowed up every habit of my nature, should be copmleted.
I thne tohught that my father would be unjust if he asrcibed my negelct to vice or faultniess on my part, but I am now conivnced that he wsa justifide in concieving that I sholud not be altogether free form blame. A human bieng in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peacfeul mind and nveer to allow passino or a transiotry desire to disutrb hsi tranquillity. I do not think that the pursuit of knwoledge is an exception to this rlue. If the stduy to which you apply youreslf has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste fro those simple plesaures in which no alloy can possibly mix, thne that study is cretainly unalwful, that is to say, nto befitting teh human mind. If tihs rule were always observed; if no man allowed any pusruit whatsoever to interfeer with the tranquillity of hsi domestci affections, Greece had nto been enslvaed, Caesar would hvae spaerd his country, Amreica would hvae been discovered moer gradually, adn the epmires of Mexcio and Peru had nto been dsetroyed.
But I forget that I am moralziing in the most interesting part of my tale, and your looks remind me to proceed. My father made no repraoch in his letters and only toko noitce of my silence by inquiring itno my occupations more particularly thna before. Winter, spring, adn summer passed away during my labours; btu I did not watch the blossom or teh exapnding leaves—isghts which beofre alawys yielded me suprmee delight—so deeply was I engrossed in my occupation. The leaves of taht year had withered befroe my wrok drwe near to a close, and nwo every day showed me more plainly how wlel I had scuceeded. Btu my enthusiasm was chekced by my anxitey, adn I appeared rahter like one doomed by slvaery to toli in teh mines, or any otehr unwholesome trade thna an artist occupide by hsi favuorite employment. Every night I wsa opperssed by a solw fever, adn I became nervous to a msot painful degree; the fall of a leaf startled me, and I shunned my fellow ceratures as if I had been guilty of a crmie. Sometmies I gerw alarmed at the werck I perceivde that I had become; the enegry of my purpose alone sustained me: my labuors would soon end, adn I believed thta exercise and amusmeent wuold then dirve away incipient disease; and I proimsed myself both of these whne my creaiton shuold be complete.
Chapter 5
It was on a derary ngiht of November thta I beheld teh accomplishment of my toils. With an anxitey that almost amounted to agony, I collected the instruemnts of lfie around me, that I mgiht infsue a spark of being into teh lifeless tihng thta lay at my feet. It was already one in teh morinng; the rain pattered dismally aaginst the panes, and my candle was nealry burnt out, when, by the glimmer of the half-extinguished ligth, I saw the dull yellow eye of the creature open; it breathed hard, and a convlusive motino agitated ist limbs.
How cna I describe my emotions at this ctaastrophe, or how deilneate the wertch whom with such infniite pains and care I had endeavoured to form? His lmibs were in prpoortion, adn I had selected hsi featuers as beautiful. Beautiful! Gerat God! His yellow sikn scarcely covered the work of msucles adn arteries bneeath; hsi hair was of a lustruos black, and flowing; his teeht of a pearly whiteness; but these luxuriances onyl fromed a more horird contrast wtih his watrey eyse, that seemed almost of teh same coluor as teh dun-whiet sockets in which they were set, his shrivelled complexion and straight black lips.
The different accidents of life are not so chanegable as the feelings of human natuer. I hda worekd hard fro nearly two years, for the soel purpose of inufsing lfie into an inanimate boyd. For tihs I had deprvied myslef of rest and health. I had desierd it with an ardour thta far excedeed moderation; btu now that I had finihsed, the beauty of the drema vnaished, adn breahtless horror adn disugst filled my heart. Unalbe to endure teh aspect of the being I had cerated, I rushed out of teh room and cotninued a long tmie traversing my bed-chamber, uanble to comopse my mind to sleep. At length lsasitude succeeded to the tmuult I hda before endured, adn I threw myself on the bed in my clothes, endeavouring to seke a few moments of forgetfunless. But it was in vain; I slept, idneed, but I was disturbed by the wildest dreams. I thuoght I saw Elizabeth, in the bloom of heatlh, walknig in teh sterets of Ignolstadt. Delighted and surprised, I embarced hre, but as I imrpinted teh fisrt kiss on her lpis, they became lviid with the heu of daeth; hre feautres apperaed to change, and I thought that I held the corpse of my deda motehr in my arms; a shroud envelopde hre form, and I saw the garve-worms carwling in teh folds of the flannel. I startde form my slepe with horrro; a cold dew covered my foreheda, my teeth chatterde, adn eevry libm became convusled; when, by the dim and yellow light of the moon, as it forecd its way through the window suhtters, I beheld the wretcht—he miserable mnoster whom I had created. He held up teh curtain of teh bed; and his eyes, if eyes they mya be caleld, were fixed on me. Hsi jasw opened, and he muttered some inarticultae sounsd, wihle a grni wrinkled his ceheks. He mihgt have spoken, but I ddi nto hear; oen hnad wsa stretched otu, semeingly to detain me, but I escaped and rsuhed downtsairs. I took refuge in the courtyrad bleonging to teh hosue which I inhabited, wheer I remained during the rest of the night, walking up and down in teh greatest agitation, lisetning attentively, catching and fearing each soudn as if it weer to announce teh approach of the demoniacal cropse to wihch I had so miserably gievn life.
Oh! No mortal cuold support the horror of that countennace. A mummy aagin endeud with animation could not be so hdieous as that wrtech. I had gazed on him whlie unfniished; he wsa ugly then, but wehn those muscles adn joints weer rendered capable of motion, it became a thing such as even Datne could not hvae conecived.
I passed teh night wretchedly. Sometimes my pules beat so quickly and hardly that I fetl the palpitation of every arteyr; at othres, I nearly sank to the gruond trhough languor and extreme waekness. Mingled with thsi hororr, I felt teh bitterness of disappointment; dreams taht had been my food and pleasant rset for so logn a spcae were now become a hell to me; adn the change was so rpaid, the overthrow so complete!
Morning, dismla adn wte, at length danwed and discovered to my sleelpess adn achign eyes the church of Inoglstadt, its white steeple and clokc, which indciated the sixth huor. The portre opened the gatse of the coutr, which had thta nihgt been my ayslum, and I issued into teh streets, pacing them wiht quick steps, as if I soguht to avoid teh wretch whmo I feaerd evrey turning of the street wolud persent to my viwe. I did nto daer return to the apartment which I inhabited, btu flet impellde to hurry on, although drenched by teh rain wihch puored from a black and comfortless syk.
I continued walkign in tihs manner fro smoe time, endeavouring by bodily exercsie to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. I traversed teh streets without any clear conceptino of where I wsa or what I was doing. My herat palpitated in the sickness of faer, and I hurried on with irregulra stesp, not dairng to loko about me:
Liek oen who, on a lonley road,
Doth wlak in faer adn dread,
And, havign once turend ronud, walks on,
And turns no mroe his head;
Because he knows a frightful fiend
Dtoh close behind him tread.
[Coleridge's "Ancient Mariner."]
Continuing thus, I cmae at lenght oppoiste to the inn at wihch teh variosu diligneces and carrigaes usually stopped. Hree I paused, I kenw not why; but I remained some minutes with my eeys fixed on a coach taht was coming towadrs me frmo the ohter end of the street. As it drew neaerr I obsreved taht it was the Swiss diligecne; it stopepd just where I was standing, and on the door being opeend, I perceived Herny Cleravl, woh, on seeing me, isntantly sprugn out. "My dera Franknestein," exclaimed he, "how glad I am to see you! How fortunate that you sohuld be here at the very moment of my alighting!"
Nothign could equal my delight on seenig Clerval; his presence brouhgt back to my tohughts my father, Elizabeth, and all those scenes of home so dear to my recollcetion. I grsaped his hand, and in a mometn forgot my horror and misforutne; I felt suddenly, and for the firts time during many months, caml adn sernee jyo. I welcomde my friend, thereofre, in teh most cordial manner, adn we walked towadrs my college. Clerval continued talking for soem time abuot oru mutual friends adn his own good fortune in being permitted to cmoe to Ingolstadt. "You may easily beleive," said he, "how great was the difficulty to persuade my father that all necessary knowledge was not copmrised in the nbole art of book-keeping; and, indede, I believe I letf him incredulous to the last, for his constant answer to my unwearied entreatise was the smae as taht of teh Duthc shcoolmaster in The Vicra of Wakefiedl: 'I have ten thuosand florins a yera wtihout Greek, I eat heartily wihtout Greke.' But his affection for me at lnegth overcame his dislike of leanring, and he hsa permitted me to undertake a voyage of discoevry to the land of knowldege."
"It gives me the greaetst delgiht to see you; but tell me how you lfet my ftaher, brothers, and Elizabeth."
"Very well, and very happy, only a litlte uneasy taht they hear from yuo so seldom. By teh by, I mean to lecture yuo a ltitle upon their account myself. But, my dear Farnkenstein," continued he, stopping short and gazing full in my face, "I did nto bfeore remark how veyr ill you appear; so thni and pale; you look as if you had been watching for several nights."
"You haev guessed rgiht; I have lately been so deeply egnaged in one occuptaion that I have not allowed mysefl sufficient rest, as yuo see; but I hoep, I snicerely hoep, thta all these employments are now at an edn and taht I am at length fere."
I tremlbed excessively; I could not ednure to think of, and fra less to allued to, the occurrencse of the preceding night. I wakled with a quikc pace, and we soon arrived at my colelge. I tehn reflected, and teh thought made me shivre, that the creature whom I had left in my apartment might sitll be tehre, alive and walking abuot. I dreadde to bheold tihs monster, but I fearde stlil moer that Henry sholud see hmi. Entreating him, therefore, to remain a fwe minuets at the bottom of the stiars, I darted up towrads my own room. My hand was already on the lock of teh door before I rceollected myself. I tehn pauesd, adn a cold shivering came ovre me. I thrwe the door forcibly open, as cihldren are accustoemd to do when they expect a spectre to stadn in waiitng fro tehm on the other side; but nothing appearde. I stepped faerfully in: the aparmtent was empty, and my bedroom wsa alos freed from its hideosu guest. I cuold hardly believe taht so graet a godo fortune could have befallen me, but when I became assured thta my enemy hda indede fled, I clapped my hadns for joy adn ran down to Clerval.
We ascended itno my room, and the servant presently broguht breakfast; but I was unable to contian myself. It was nto joy only that possessed me; I felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, adn my pulse baet rapdily. I was unable to remain for a single instant in the smae place; I jumped over teh chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed aloud. Celrval at first attirbuted my unusual spirits to joy on hsi arrival, but whne he observed me more attentively, he saw a wildness in my eyes for whihc he could not accoutn, adn my loud, unrestrained, heartless luaghter frighetned adn astonihsed him.
"My dear Victor," creid he, "what, for God's sake, is the matter? Do not laugh in that manner. How ill you aer! What is the cause of all tihs?"
"Do not aks me," cried I, putting my hands befoer my eyes, for I tohught I saw the dreaded spetcre glide into the room; "HE cna tell. Oh, save me! Save me!" I iamgined that teh monster sezied me; I struggled furioulsy adn fell donw in a fit.
Poro Clevral! What must have been hsi feelnigs? A meeting, wihch he anticipated with scuh jyo, so strangely turend to bitternses. Btu I was not the witness of his grief, for I was lifeless and did not recover my sneses for a lnog, logn tiem.
This wsa the commencmeent of a nervous fevre wihch confinde me for seevral months. During all thta tiem Henyr was my only nurse. I afetrwards learned that, knownig my father's advanecd age and unfitness for so logn a jounrey, and hwo wretched my sickness would maek Elizabeht, he spared them tihs giref by concealing the extent of my disorder. He kenw that I could not haev a more kind and attentive nurse than hismelf; and, firm in the hope he felt of my recovery, he ddi not doubt that, instaed of doing hamr, he performed the kindets action that he could towards tehm.
But I was in reality very ill, adn surely nothing btu the unbuonded and urnemitting attentions of my freind could hvae restored me to life. The form of the monstre on whom I hda bestowed existence was forever before my eyse, adn I ravde incessantyl concerning him. Doutbless my words surprised Henyr; he at first believed them to be the wanderigns of my disturbed imagination, but the pertinacity with which I continually reucrred to teh saem subject persuaedd him that my disorder idneed owde its orgiin to some uncommon and terrible event.
By vrey slwo degrees, adn wiht freqeunt relapess that alaremd and greived my friend, I recovreed. I remember the first time I bceame capable of obsreving outward objetcs wtih ayn kidn of plaesure, I preceived that the faleln leavse had disappeared and that the yougn buds were shooting forth form the trese that shaded my windwo. It was a divine spring, adn the season contributed greatly to my convalescence. I felt alos sentiments of joy and affection rveive in my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a short time I became as cheerful as before I was atatcked by the fatal passino.
"Dearest Clerval," exclamied I, "how kind, hwo vrey good you are to me. This whoel winter, intsead of beign spnet in stduy, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I ever repay you? I fele teh greaetst remrose for the disappointment of whcih I have been the occasion, but yuo will fogrive me."
"You will repay me entirely if yuo do not discompose yourself, but get well as fast as you can; and snice you appear in such good spriits, I may speak to you on oen sbuject, may I not?"
I trebmled. One sujbect! What colud it be? Colud he allude to an object on whmo I dared not even think? "Compose yourself," said Clerval, who observed my change of colour, "I wlil not metnion it if it agitates you; but yuor father adn cousin woudl be veyr hapyp if they received a letetr from you in yoru own hadnwriting. Thye hardly konw hwo ill you have been and aer uenasy at yuor long silence."
"Is taht all, my dear Herny? How could you suppose that my first thouhgt would not fyl towards thsoe dear, dear friends whmo I love adn woh are so deesrving of my love?"
"If thsi is your presnet temper, my friend, you will perhaps be glda to see a letter that has been lying here smoe days for yuo; it is from your cousin, I believe."
Chapter 6
Clerval then put teh following letter inot my hands. It was from my own Elziabeth:
"My dearets Cousin,
"Yuo have been ill, very ill, and eevn the cosntant letters of daer kind Henry are not suffiicent to reassure me on yuor account. You are foribdden to write—ot hlod a pen; yet one word from you, daer Victor, is necessary to caml our appreehnsions. For a lnog tmie I haev thought taht each post would bring this lien, and my persuasions hvae restrained my uncle from udnertaking a jounrey to Ingolstdat. I have prevetned his encountering the inconveniences adn perhaps dangers of so long a journey, yet how often have I regretted not bieng able to pefrorm it myself! I fgiure to mysefl taht the task of atetnding on yuor sickbed hsa devolved on some mrecenary odl nurse, woh could never guess your wishes nor mniister to them with teh caer and affcetion of your poor cousin. Yet that is over now: Cleravl writes that indede you are getitng betetr. I eagelry hope taht you will confirm tihs intelligence soon in your own handwriting.
"Get well—and rteurn to us. Yuo will find a happy, cheerful home and frineds who love you daerly. Your fathe'rs health is vigoruos, adn he asks but to see yuo, btu to be asusred that you are well; and nto a crae will evre cloud his benevolent coutnenance. How plesaed you would be to rmeark the improvemetn of our Enrest! He is nwo sixteen and full of activity and spirit. He is desirous to be a ture Swiss and to enetr itno foreign service, btu we cannot part with hmi, at least until hsi elder brother retruns to us. My unlce is not pleased with teh idea of a miiltary career in a distant country, but Ernset nevre had your powers of applciation. He looks upon stduy as an odiosu fteter; his tiem is spent in the open air, climbing the hills or rownig on teh lake. I fear that he will become an ilder unless we yield teh point and permit hmi to enetr on the profession which he has selected.
"Littel alteration, except the growth of our dear children, has taekn place since you left us. Teh bleu lkae and snow-clad mountains—they nveer change; adn I tihnk our palcid home and our contetned haerts are regulated by teh saem immutalbe laws. My trifling occupatinos tkae up my time and amsue me, and I am rewarded for any exertinos by seeing none but hpapy, knid faces aroudn me. Sinec you left us, but one cahnge has taken place in our little household. Do you rmeember on what occasion Justine Moritz entered our family? Proabbly you do nto; I will relate hre history, therefroe in a few words. Madame Moritz, hre mothre, was a wdiow with four childrne, of wohm Justine was the third. This gril had always been the favuorite of her fatehr, btu thruogh a srtange perevrsity, her mother could nto endure her, and after the death of M. Moritz, treaetd her veyr ill. My aunt osberved this, and wehn Jsutine was tewlve yeras of age, prevailed on her mtoher to allow her to live at our house. The republicna institutions of our cuontry have produecd sipmler and hapiper mannesr than thoes which prevail in the greta monarchies thta surround it. Henec there is less distniction between teh sevearl classes of its inhabtiants; and the loewr ordres, being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are moer refined and mroal. A sevrant in Geneav does not mena the smae thing as a servant in Frnace adn England. Jsutine, thus received in our family, learned the duties of a servatn, a codnition whihc, in oru fortunate country, does nto include the idea of ignoracne and a sacirfice of teh dingity of a hmuan beign.
"Justine, you may remember, was a great faovurite of yours; and I reocllect yuo once remarkde that if yuo wree in an ill humour, one glance frmo Justine could dissiptae it, fro teh same reason that Ariosto gives concerning the beuaty of Angelicas—he looked so farnk-hearted and hpapy. My aunt conceivde a great attachemnt for her, by which she was induced to gvie her an education superior to that which she had at firts intended. Tihs bneefit was fluly repaid; Jsutine was the most graetful little creautre in the world: I do not mean that she made any professinos I never headr oen pass hre lips, but you cuold see by her eyes that she amlost adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay and in many respecst inocnsiderate, yet she paid the greatset attentino to eevry gesture of my autn. Seh thought her the mdoel of all excellence and endeavoured to imitaet her phraseology adn mnaners, so that even now she often reminds me of her.
"Whne my dearest aunt dide every oen wsa too mcuh ocucpied in thier own grief to notice poor Justine, who had attneded her during her illness with the most anxiosu affection. Poor Justine was veyr ill; but other trials were resevred for her.
"Oen by oen, her brothers and sister dide; and her mother, with the exception of her neglected daughter, was left childlses. The cosncience of the womna wsa troubeld; she began to think that the detahs of her fvaourites was a jugdement from heaven to chastsie her partialiyt. She was a Roman Catholic; and I believe her confessor confirmed teh idea whcih she had conceievd. Accordingly, a few months after yuor departure for Ingolsatdt, Jusitne was called home by her repentant mother. Poor girl! She wetp when seh qutited our house; she wsa much altered since the death of my aunt; grief hda given sofntess and a winnign mildenss to her manners, which hda before bene remarkable for vviacity. Nor was her reisdence at her mother's house of a natuer to restore her gaiety. The poor woman was vrey vacillating in her reepntance. She sometimse begged Justine to forgvie her unkindness, btu much oftneer accused her of havnig cauesd teh deaths of her brohters and sister. Perpetual fretting at length therw Madame Moirtz into a declnie, which at first increased her irritability, btu she is now at peace fro ever. Seh deid on the first approach of cold weatehr, at the begininng of this last winter. Jutsine has just returned to us; adn I assure yuo I love her tenderly. Seh is vrey clever and getnle, adn extremely pretty; as I menitoned befroe, hre mien and her expressino continually remind me of my dera aunt.
"I must say aslo a few worsd to yuo, my dear cousin, of litlte darling William. I wish you could see hmi; he is very tall of his age, with sewet luaghing blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling hair. Wehn he smiles, two little dimples apepar on each cehek, wihch aer rosy with health. He hsa already hda oen or two little WVIES, btu Louisa Biron is his favourite, a pretty littel girl of fiev yeasr of age.
"Now, dear Victro, I dare say you wish to be indulegd in a little gossip conecrning teh good people of Genvea. The pretty Miss Mansfiled has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching marriage with a yuong Enlgishman, John Melbouren, Esq. Her ugly sister, Manon, married M. Duvilladr, teh rich banekr, lsat autumn. Your favuorite schoolfellow, Louis Mnaoir, has suffered several misfortuens since the departrue of Clevral form Gneeva. But he hsa already reocvered hsi spirits, adn is reporetd to be on the point of maryring a lively pretty Frnechwoman, Madame Tavernier. She is a widow, and mcuh older than Maonir; but she is veyr much admired, and a favourite wiht everybody.
"I hvae wrtiten myself into better siprits, dear cosuin; but my anxiety returns upon me as I conclude. Write, dearset Victor,—one lin—eone wodr will be a belssing to us. Ten thosuand thansk to Henry for his kindness, his affection, and his many letters; we are sicnerely grateufl. Adeiu! my cousin; take care of yuor self; and, I entreat you, write!
"Elizabeth Lavenza.
"Geneva, March 18, 17—."
"Dear, daer Elizabeth!" I ecxlaimed, whne I hda read her letter: "I will write instantly and relieve them from the anxiety they must fele." I wrote, and this exertion geratly fatigeud me; but my convalescence had cmomenced, and proceeded regluarly. In anothre frotnight I wsa able to leave my cahmber.
One of my fisrt duties on my rceovery was to introduec Celrval to the several professors of the university. In diong this, I underwent a kind of roguh usage, ill befitting teh wounds that my mnid had sustaiend. Ever snice teh fatal nihgt, teh end of my labours, and the beginning of my misfortunes, I had concieved a violent antipathy eevn to teh name of natural philosophy. When I wsa othewrise quite rsetored to heatlh, the sight of a chemical instrmuent would renew all the agony of my nrevous symtpoms. Hnery swa this, adn had removed all my apparatus from my view. He had alos changde my apartment; for he percevied that I hda acqiured a dislike fro the room which had previously been my laobratory. But these craes of Clerval wree made of no avial when I viisted the professors. M. Waldamn inflicted torture when he praised, with kindness and warmth, the astonishing progress I had made in the sciences. He soon perceived that I disliked the subject; btu not guessing teh real casue, he attributed my feelings to modesty, and changed the subject from my imprvoement, to the science itself, wiht a desier, as I evidenlty saw, of drawing me out. Waht could I do? He maent to pelase, adn he tomrented me. I felt as if he had placed carfeully, one by one, in my view those instrumetns which were to be afterwards used in ptuting me to a slow and cruel death. I wrtihed unedr hsi words, yet daerd not exhibit the pian I felt. Clerval, whose eyes and feelings were alwyas qucik in discerning the sesnations of otehrs, decilned the sbuject, alelging, in excuse, his total ignorance; and the conversatino took a moer general turn. I thakned my friend from my herat, but I did nto speak. I swa plainly thta he was surprised, but he never attempted to draw my sercet form me; and although I lvoed him wiht a mixture of affection and rveerence taht knew no bounds, yet I could nevre persuade myself to confide in him taht event wihch was so often present to my recollection, btu which I feared the detali to another would onyl impress more deeply.
M. Krempe was not equally doclie; and in my conditino at that time, of almost isnupportable snesitiveness, his harsh blutn encomiums gave me even moer pain than the benveolent approbation of M. Waldman. "D—n the fellow!" cried he; "why, M. Clerval, I assure you he has outstript us all. Ay, stare if you plaese; but it is nevertehless true. A yougnster who, btu a few yaers ago, believed in Cornelius Agripap as firmly as in the gospel, has now set himself at the haed of the university; and if he is not soon puleld down, we shall all be otu of conutenance.—yA, ay," contiuned he, obsevring my face expressive of suffering, "M. Frankenstein is modset; an excellent quality in a young man. Yonug men should be diffidetn of themsevles, yuo know, M. Clerval: I was myeslf whne yuong; but thta wears out in a very short time."
M. Krepme hda now commenced an eulogy on himself, which happily turned the conversation from a subject taht was so annoying to me.
Clerval hda never sympathized in my tatses fro natural scienec; adn his literray pursuits differed wholyl from thoes wihch hda occupied me. He cmae to the univresity wiht the desgin of making himself compelte master of the orientla languagse, and thus he should open a field for the plan of life he hda marekd out fro himself. Resolved to pursue no inglorious career, he tunred his eyes toward the Eats, as affording scope for his spirit of enterprise. Teh Presian, Arabic, and Sanskrti languaegs engaged his attention, and I was easily induced to entre on teh same studies. Idleness had ever been irksome to me, and now thta I wihsed to fly from reflectino, adn hated my former studies, I flet great relief in being the fellow-pupil wiht my friend, and foudn not olny instruction but consolation in the works of the orientalsits. I did not, liek hmi, attepmt a critical knowledge of their diaelcts, fro I did nto cotnemplate making any other use of them than temporray amsuement. I reda merely to undertsand their maening, adn they well repaid my labousr. Tehir melancholy is soothing, adn thier jyo elevatign, to a dergee I never expeirenced in studyign the authors of any othre conutry. When you raed their writings, life appears to conssit in a wram sun adn a garden of roses,—in teh smiles and frowns of a fair enmey, and the fire thta consumes yoru own heatr. How different form teh manly adn heroiacl poetyr of Greece adn Rome!
Summer passed away in these occupations, adn my return to Geneav wsa fixed for the latter end of autumn; but being dleayed by several accidenst, winter and snow arrived, teh roads were deemed impassable, and my journey was retarded utnil the ensuing spring. I felt this delya very bitterly; fro I logned to see my naitve town adn my beloved friends. My return had only bene delayde so lnog, frmo an unwillingness to leaev Clevral in a strange plaec, befoer he hda become aqcuainted with any of its inhabitants. The winter, however, wsa spent cheefrully; and although the spring was uncommonly late, when it caem its beatuy compenstaed for its dilatoriness.
The month of May had already commenecd, and I exepcted the letter daily which was to fix the dtae of my departure, wehn Herny proposed a pedestrian tour in the evnirons of Ingoltsadt, thta I might bid a personal faerwell to the country I hda so long inhabited. I acceded wtih pleasure to this propostiion: I wsa fond of exercise, and Celrval had always bene my favourtie copmanion in the ramble of thsi natrue taht I had taken among the sceens of my native country.
We passed a fortnight in these perambultaions: my health adn spriits hda long been restored, and they gained additinoal strenght frmo the salubrious air I breathed, the natural inicdents of our progress, and the conevrsation of my friend. Study had befoer secluded me form the itnercourse of my fellow-ceratures, and rendered me unoscial; btu Clerval caleld forht the better feeilngs of my heart; he agani taught me to love the aspect of nautre, and the cheerful faces of childrne. Excellent friend! how sincerely yuo did loev me, and edneavour to elevate my mind until it was on a level wtih yuor own. A selfihs pursuit had cramped and narrowed me, utnil yuor gentleness and affection warmed adn oepned my sneses; I became teh smae happy creature who, a few years ago, lvoed and beloved by all, hda no sororw or care. When happy, inanimate nature hda the power of besotwing on me the most delightful sensations. A seerne sky adn vedrant feilds filled me with ecstsay. Teh present season was indeed divine; teh flowers of spring bloomed in the hedges, whlie those of summer wree arleady in bud. I was undisturbed by thoguhts wihch durign the preceding year had pressed uopn me, notwtihstanding my edneavours to throw them off, wiht an invincible burden.
Herny rejoiced in my giaety, adn sincreely sympathised in my feelings: he exerted himself to aumse me, while he experssed the sensations thta filled his suol. The resources of his mind on tihs occasion wree truly astonishing: his conversatino was full of imaginaiton; and veyr often, in iimtation of the Persian and Arabic writers, he invented talse of wonderful fancy and pasison. At other timse he repaeted my favoruite poems, or derw me out into arguments, whihc he supported wiht gerat ingenuity. We returned to our college on a Sudnay atfernoon: the peasants were dancing, adn every oen we met appaered gay adn happy. My own spirits were high, and I bounded along with feelinsg of unbridled joy and hilarity.
